Charles Johnstone
THE ADVENTURES OF ANTHONY VARNISH. 


THE ADVENTURES OF  ANTHONY VARNISH;  OR, A PEEP AT THE MANNERS OF SOCIETY. BY AN ADEPT. 
Parva res est voluptatum, in vitâ, prae quam quod molestum est. 



TO GEORGE COLMAN,  Esq 


SIR, 

I BEG leave to lay an inconsiderable trifle at your feet.— The motive, that impels me to such a proceeding, is too obvious, either to escape your notice or that of the public; namely, to place a weak bantling under the wing of a powerful protector. 

I forbear to make use of that fulsome panegyric, so usually conveyed in dedications; first, because I should be concerned to see you placed on a level with persons who owe their consequence to false praise; and, secondly, because it is wholly unnecessary to tell the world, that you are not only one of the greatest examples of merit yourself, as an Englishman; but a warm patron, whenever you meet with it in others. 
The following sketches are gleaned from the field of nature, and some

of the portraits are copied, I flatter myself, with a faithful pencil. 
If a perusal of them can make you laugh, in spite of the inroads of care, or the attacks of disease, I shall think myself sufficiently rewarded for my trouble. 

I am, SIR,
with great respect, your sincere admirer, and most obedient servant, The AUTHOR. 




ADVERTISEMENT. 
CONSIDERING the partiality that is entertained for novels in this country, it is much to be regretted that the generality of them are not written in a style and manner sufficiently excellent to justify so established a prejudice in their favour; — on the contrary, in very many instances, we find the characters

are unnatural, the plot improbable, and the language flimsy and unmeaning. Besides, it is too often objected, by the thinking part of the world, that their tendency operates rather to corrupt the heart than to amend it, as the writers endeavour to throw a sort of pleasing and fashionable veil over the blandishments of vice, and make the habits of intrigue familiar to the minds of the female part of the rising generation, before they can form a proper distinction between right and wrong, which is doing a greater injury to public morality

than is at first apprehended; whereas, if the scenes were drawn from real life, the reader may not only be entertained with the absurdities of the weak part of human nature, but at the same time gather experience from the ill consequences of their folly. But this is a species of writing either very little understood, or very difficult to be accomplished; for, scarce one in a hundred, of all the ladies and gentlemen who have favoured the world with what they call  novels,  have been able to effect it; and we are still left to lament, that the genius of a  Fielding,  a  Smollett,  or a  Goldsmith, 

is not to be discovered in any of the modern compositions of that description. 





THE ADVENTURES OF ANTHONY VARNISH. 

CHAPTER I. 

My origin and introduction into society.— A short account of my family.—My father's retirement.—His courtship of my mother.—Their marriage.—My birth. —The dreadful circumstance that accompanied it.—My mother's sickness and recovery. 

AS some curiosity may be excited in the minds of those who shall peruse the following narrative respecting

the place of my nativity, I have thought it necessary to give a brief detail of that as well as some other matters that respect my first entrance upon this great theatre, the world. I beg leave to observe, that a spirit of vanity by no means impels me to become my own biographer, as is frequently the case with certain great men, who (to use a pertinent expression from the facetious Harry Fielding upon a similar occasion) have been suspected to have lived an eccentric life, merely to have the pleasure of telling it to the world; no, I disclaim such an idea  in toto;  my motive is a sincere desire to oblige my readers of all parties and complexions; which they will readily give credit to, when they understand that the authors of my being were not remarkable for

valuing themselves upon the honour of their house or the splendour of their situations. 
I drew my first breath in Ireland, a country long since renowned for the hospitality and generous spirit of its inhabitants. The spot where I first opened my eyes upon the genial day was at a small cabin, on the borders of the famous bay of Allen, in the Queen's county. My father had served, with great credit to his country and honour to himself, in a regiment of horse at the celebrated battle of Minden, where he received a wound that incapacitated him from continuing in the army any longer. With the heart of a hero, and the resignation of a philosopher, he was found to quit a service, to which the habits of his life and a natural love for

glory had attached him in a particular manner; the recollection, that he had been an active, though humble, instrument in the abovementioned gallant action, proved a source of happiness that cheered him to his grave. 
Fatigued with the calamities of war, he pined to re-visit his native home, from which he had been separated five years;—a small portion of time perhaps to those whose hearts were never sacrificed to love and constancy; but it was not so with my father, for five years to him appeared as five thousand. 
There lived, in the neighbourhood of my grandfather, a rich farmer, who at that time rented two hundred acres from the lord of the manor. By a course of frugality and industry he had amassed sufficient wealth to command the necessaries,

and even the comforts, of life; but his riches did not consist in his money so much as in the possession of an only daughter, whom he tenderly loved, and expected to marry with advantage to a farmer's son, of the next village, of extensive property. 
The fair Kathleen was the admiration of all the young men in that part of the country; but she treated their offers of marriage with scorn and neglect, which was universally attributed to her pride, though the real motive was a secret passion she entertained for my father. In the course of their rural occupations they frequently met; — a sympathy of soul rendered them pleasing to each other; — they looked, and frequently gave involuntary sighs, the meaning of which they could not comprehend;—

they sought every opportunity of viewing each other, but it produced no other effect than riveting their chains the stronger. At last, nature, tired with the conflict, urged my father to a declaration of his passion; he seized the trembling hand of his dear Kathleen, and, pressing it to his lips, kissed it with an ardour that alarmed the natural modesty of his mistress;—the blood rushed into her cheeks, and, hastily withdrawing her hand, she reproved his warmth with an air of tenderness that tacitly encouraged the freedoms which her language affected to depress. 
By repeated solicitations my father won her to declare that she would marry only him; but, prudence forbidding their union at that time, they resolved to defer the completion of their bliss

till a change of circumstances should happen in their favour. Their interviews now became more frequent than ever, till their mutual passion at last reached the ears of her father, who, enraged, in the most peremptory terms of anger forbade his daughter ever to think more of her lover, whom he represented as utterly beneath her consideration or regard. 
It was not long before my father learned the dreadful issue of their affections. In the first moments of his despair he determined to put an end to an existence, which was now rendered miserable for ever: he actually was preparing for that dreadful measure, when a ray of hope diverted him from the horrid purpose; his fainting spirits once more revived, and he resolved, if possible,

to see his Kathleen once again. Cupid, ever attentive to the interests of his votaries, favoured his resolution; for, by means of a hind in the service of her father, he got a message conveyed to the mistress of his heart, earnestly intreating a meeting in the evening. She complied with his wishes, when my father, with tears in his eyes, took a final adieu; resolving, that the violence of his love should be no bar to the future happiness of his adored Kathleen. 
After a solemn and sincere interchange of those sentiments which love inspires, they parted, with their eyes bathed in tears. My father, to forget his sorrows, repaired to a public house in an adjoining village, where, meeting with a recruiting-serjeant, who, struck with the manly beauty of his figure,

made him a tender of his services, and courted him to join a regiment, then stationed in that county. Urged by despair, and willing to die, he accepted his proposal, joined the corps, and went abroad, where he was soon signalized for his bravery and good conduct. On the establishment of the peace he returned home, when, upon inquiring after his dear Kathleen, he learned that she had resisted every importunity of her father to marry, who, dying shortly after, in consequence of her disobedience left her destitute of a shilling. 
My father soon discovered the place of her retreat, and, flying on the wings of love, he rescued her from that misery to which she was resigned, from an apprehension that her lover was no more. The joy that followed upon their meeting

can be conceived better than described;—to be brief, they were married in a few days, and lived together many years afterwards, exemplary objects of mutual love and fidelity. 
Two moons had scarce wasted, since Hymen smiled upon their wishes, when my mother exhibited evident signs of pregnancy: every care was taken by my father, every consolation administered, that could reduce the pains of her situation; he viewed the progress of her state with joy, anxiously looking forward to the time that heaven should vouchsafe to give them an offspring, equally dear to both. 
My mother had advanced into the eighth month of her pregnancy, when my father, labouring one evening in his potatoe-garden, was alarmed with

the cries of a female. He immediately rushed, as it were by instinct, to her relief; but who can paint the anguish of his soul, when, looking over the hedge, he perceived my mother prostrate on the road! he instantly raised her up, and, inquiring into the cause of her affright, learned that a bull, driven by some boys, rushed by her when she was on the return from market, when her fears had overcome her so far that she shrieked and fainted away.— Luckily the place of her accident was within a hundred yards of her own cabin, to which she was conducted by my father with all possible tenderness, who, placing her in a chair, began to rub her temples, and exercise all those little assiduities which are so pleasing to the human mind in the hour of sickness or

distress. But, notwithstanding his utmost efforts, my mother grew still worse; when, calling in the assistance of a female neighbour, she pronounced she was in labour. Upon this declaration she was put to bed, and every assistance procured that the country could afford. Three quarters of an hour after the arrival of the midwife I was brought forth, and by her triumphantly displayed to my father as one of the finest male children that ever she had the happiness of introducing into this scurvy, motley, world of disquiet and vicissitudes. My father could not conceal his rapture at my infantine beauty and shape, notwithstanding the moans and agony of my mother, who lay writhing under the pains with which heaven has thought

proper to accompany the dearest consequence of wedded love. 
However, what with the tenderness of my father, and the administrations of the midwife, in about a fortnight the rosy hue of health began to re-assume her throne on the cheek of my mother; her vivacity returned, my father rejoiced, and every necessary preparation was made to render the approaching christening as splendid and happy as the narrow circumstances of my family would permit. 



CHAPTER II. 

My christening.—Am sent to school.—The delight which parents take in the improvement of their offspring.—Sent to a schoolmaster. — My astonishing progress in learning.—My father's death. —My mother's melancholy.—Her death. —The beginning of my distresses. 

THE time prescribed by custom having arrived, when it was thought proper to give me a Christian name, a select number of relations and friends were summoned to attend the ceremony. Among the rest was an uncle of my father, who had signalized himself, upon many occasions, in rendering him every service that lay in his power; and, to

manifest his gratitude in the best manner he was able, my father resolved that I should be named after him;—I was accordingly christened ANTHONY, (that being the name of the old gentleman,) with all due rites and solemn preparations. It were needless to recount all the little pleasantries and harmless jokes which passed in that rural, though friendly, circle upon the occasion; good humour presided at the humble board, and gave a charming zest to the joyous entertainment. After each guest had drunk a health to young Anthony in whiskey-punch, the merry group separated, and sought their respective homes, highly pleased with the conviviality of the evening. 
When I had arrived at the age of five years it was determined by my fond parents

that I should be sent to school, and an opportunity offered at that time which it was thought necessary to embrace.—The widow of an excise-officer, who had been left with a large family, in indigent circumstances, was advised by her friends to open a school, for the education of children at a certain age, to assist in the support of her young family. I was accordingly sent to Mrs. Goodman, with a strong charge from my father that she would instruct me in my letters with all possible expedition, and an intreaty from my poor mother that she would not whip me, for fear of spoiling my disposition. 
I attended the school regularly for three years, morning and afternoon, at the expiration of which I had made such a progress in my learning, that I was

spoken of as a prodigy for my years;— I not only did great credit to the endeavours of Mrs. Goodman, but gave infinite satisfaction to my poor parents, under the idea that they had not bestowed their money for nothing. This part of my education stood them in half-a-crown a quarter;—an inconsiderable sum to the affluent and the vain, but a very important one to my father and mother, the former of whom laboured at husbandry for the poor pittance of sixpence per day, and the latter spun yarn for a much less consideration. 
From this school I was removed to learn Latin and writing at a hedge academy, kept for that purpose by a Romish priest, who had been degraded for mal-practices in his profession by an ecclesiastic synod of his own persuasion.

I had not been six months in my new situation, when, by the quickness of my parts and the cunning of my address, I gained an entire ascendency over the will of this country pedagogue, which was considered as a very flattering circumstance, as Father Doolough was not remarkable for the gentleness of his disposition or the charity of his opinion. However, the gratitude of my parents did not suffer his partiality to their child to go unrewarded; every little opportunity was seized to send his reverence a present of some fresh butter, milk, and a piece of pork every Christmas, when they killed a pig. It must be owned, to the generality of my readers such acknowledgements will appear trifling; but the cheerfulness with which

they were given was more than a compensation for their deficiency in value. 
I made an astonishing progress in my learning for my years, and could construe the easiest of the Latin authors with tolerable facility, when a dreadful accident happened, which proved, in its consequences, a fatal wound to my prosperity.—My father, returning home from a neighbouring fair, where he had been to purchase a cow, was thrown from his horse, and died upon the spot. When the news was first brought to my mother she was deprived of her reason, and did not recover the use of her understanding until the remains of my much-lamented parent had been deposited to sleep with his fathers:—from that moment she gave herself up a prey to grief and lamentation; a rooted melancholy

fastened on her mind, and, secluding herself from comfort and society, her constitution was greatly impaired; the little property that their parsimony had gathered together was now diminishing daily, her dearest concerns were neglected, and even my presence ceased to give her pleasure. After languishing for a few months, the cold hand of death put a final period to all her miseries, and left me an orphan, at twelve years of age, to struggle with a base world in the best manner I was able. 



CHAPTER III. 

Enter into the service of Father Doolough.—Become the object of his hatred.—Lament my situation.—Account of my master's niece.—An accident occurs for which I am punished with great severity.—My elopement from school.—Arrival at a hedge alehouse.— A description of the company.—The influence of priestcraft.—A bloody affray, and its dreadful consequences. 

AFTER the burial of my mother, a cousin of her's, who entertained a sincere regard for her memory, and being a man not wholly unacquainted with the impulse of humanity, undertook to put me in a situation that should

be most likely ultimately to turn out to my advantage. After devising various schemes, it was settled between him and my schoolmaster that I should remain in the house of Father Doolough, and, by serving him in the capacity of his boy, endeavour, by waiting upon his person, sweeping the school, and performing numberless other little offices, to repay him for the charges of victuals and education. I entered in this new department with more cheerfulness than could be expected from a child of my tender years, who had so recently been deprived of parents, whose only wish was to render him happy. But many days had not passed over my head before I felt the loss of their protection and kindness. My master, being naturally of a morose and saturnine disposition,

seemed to single me out as the object of his resentment, when any accident or untoward circumstance made him angry. One evening, when he returned home from a neighbouring village, I perceived his countenance, naturally stern and forbidding, heightened with an unusual degree of severity. He called for me to take off his boots: I went, trembling with apprehension, and had scarce laid hold of his foot, when he gave me a kick, which laid me senseless on the floor; at the same time loading me with the most opprobrious epithets, calling me an aukward rascal, and that I was not worth bestowing bread and water upon. I made all possible haste to retreat from his fury and abuse, and, hiding myself in the school-room, gave vent to a flood of tears, which in some

measure relieved my heart:—I considered that as the first lesson of all my future sorrow; I bewailed my condition in terms of regret and despair; but, knowing of no remedy but patience, I resolved to bear up under my misfortunes in the best manner I was able. When I had indulged myself in these reveries for about half an hour, I was visited by my master's niece, Judy, a good-natured girl, about five years older than myself, and who compassionated me from a spirit of sympathy, as her uncle, notwithstanding the tie of consanguinity, very frequently used her in a manner to the full as cruel and unjustifiable. 
In this manner did I live for a whole twelvemonth, the humble, helpless, victim of an unfeeling barbarian, and probably

should have continued much longer, had not a circumstance occurred which determined me to change my situation at all events.—Unfortunately for me, some boys, belonging to our school, had broke into the fruit-garden of a gentleman in the neighbourhood, and not only stripped the bushes of all the gooseberries and currants they could meet, but committed various other wanton depredations, such as breaking the fences and destroying the flowers. A formal complaint was lodged by the gentleman, whose gardener swore positively that he saw a boy in the garden, and traced him as far as the school. The boys were all severally examined, and, dreading the schoolmaster's vengeance, stoutly denied the fact. My master, thinking some expiation absolutely

necessary to appease the gentleman, and not being able to charge the theft home to any one, very charitably fixed upon me, who, he asserted, was the most probable person in the school for an action of that enormity, from the wickedness and bent of my disposition. It was in vain that I fell on my knees, and protested I was innocent; his heart was steeled against my prayers, and, the more I insisted on the cruelty of punishing me for the fault of another, the more he maintained that he saw guilt in my face. He ordered two of the stoutest boys to take me on their back, and, uncovering my posteriors, flogged me, in spite of my lamentations, until the blood started at every blow. When he had satisfied his brutal inclination, I was released, a spectacle of misery and pity.—

My resentment taught me inwardly, for the first time, to mutter curses on so inflexible a tyrant: — I meditated numberless schemes of revenge; but the tenderness of my years, and the fear of the consequences, always deterred me from putting them in execution. 
When I found myself pretty well recovered from the hard punishment I had undergone, I took a firm and determined resolution to leave the house for ever. I kept my purpose secret until the moment of putting it in execution, when I took the opportunity of the pedagogue's absence from home to effect it. I took leave of his niece with tears of regret, and, wishing her everlasting happiness, set forward in the wide world, at thirteen years of age, without a parent, friend, or benefactor. 

After wandering for an hour through by-paths, and across the most unfrequented fields, to avoid meeting my master, (the idea of whom was shocking to my imagination,) I came to a little, mean-looking, cabin, which, by the well-known symbols, to Irish travellers, of a pipe and a rag stuck in the thatch, I knew to be a house of entertainment for weary wretches like myself, who, after travelling all day, solace themselves with clean straw in a corner, for the small consideration of two-pence per head. 
As I approached nearer to this humble mansion of hospitality, I heard a noise, resembling a confusion of voices, all engaged in conversation at the same time; and, above all, I could easily distinguish the melodious tones of a

bag-pipe. With some little apprehension I entered the cabin, and soon learned the cause of all this merriment, which was no other than a parcel of country people, who had assembled at this  shebeen  house, as they term it in Irish, to wake the body of the man's wife who lived there.—As this is a custom not known to the generality of my readers, I will give them an explanation. 
When any person dies in Ireland, among the lower orders of the people, it is usual for the neighbours to assemble, for a day or two previous to the interment of the body, at the house of the deceased, whose nearest relations always provide a sufficient quantity of whiskey and tobacco for the accommodation of the guests: and these meetings

are always most numerous when the deceased has been particularly well-beloved; for the circumstance of dying, in that country, is not considered among the peasantry as a matter of sorrow, but rejoicing; and this opinion is founded on the best idea imaginable, which is, that of the defunct's having been removed, by the will of heaven, from a situation laden with anxieties and trouble to a state of everlasting joy;— and the poor cottager, possessing such principles, may look down with contempt on the affluence and vices of the great world. 
After a few questions from the landlord I was introduced among the festive group, who, sitting on the ground, had formed a circle round the dead body, which was placed in a coffin, in the

center of the apartment, elevated upon two stools. In a distinguished place in the room there sat a little squat man, with a loose great coat thrown carelessly over his shoulders: he seemed about fifty years of age, with a countenance remarkably carbuncled, and so red and inflamed, that he looked at first sight like a flaming meteor: he had on a large bushy wig, without powder, a flapped hat, and boots, notwithstanding which I could see plainly that his legs, when he stood upright, formed a parenthesis, or, in other words, were extremely bandy. By the silence that was observed, whenever the little man opened his mouth, I soon found out that he was no other than the parish-priest, who had rode two miles on purpose to pay this mark of his respect to the memory

of the deceased, for whom, I understood, from the insinuations of a part of the company, he had a particular degree of esteem when living; so much so, that the foul voice of scandal was not wanting to assert, that her godly confessor, in their hours of private devotion, had a much greater regard for her body than her soul; which opinion I the more readily gave credit to, as I perceived that the widower did not pay those tokens of attention and profound respect to the priest as were reasonably to be expected, and that he bore the loss of his wife with as much indifference and philosophy as if he had been educated in St. James's parish. 
After the whiskey had circulated pretty briskly, I saw the eyes of the ecclesiastic begin to twinkle with strong

symptoms of intoxication; and the strength of the liquor had so far over-powered his understanding, that he voluntarily proposed giving the company a song; which being assented to, with the lungs of a Stentor he bellowed forth the Wedding of Baltimore; and, being joined in chorus by the rest, they made the room echo with a noise so loud as must have waked the deceased, if any thing less than the last trumpet could have roused her from the still-sleep of death. 
When the noise subsided, the priest called for his horse, signifying his intention to depart; and, getting up, staggered to the coffin, which leaning over, he uttered the following incoherent ejaculation:—"You know well enough, without my telling you, that you,—

you,—you, are my shep—shepherd, and I am your flock, and that you,— you,—ought to be after doing nothing, d'ye see, withou—ou—out my orders."—No, Father Shaughnessy," cries a fellow half drunk, "there you're out, for we are the flock and you are the shepherd."—"No bocklish, my dear," says the priest, "it's all one for that, honey;—but you,—you,— are an imper—r—tinent vagabond, so you are, to be wanting to be teaching your betters;—and, now I think of it, you hean't been at confession since last Aester, for which omisshon you will go to the devil, — Mister Terry, d'ye hear that?—And I'll tell you a little bit more for your comfort, Mister Terence Maclachlan, (for that I think is your ugly name,) if you

don't pay your dues to the church more punctually, by my own soul, and I'm not jasting, my dare, I'll be after excommunicating your mother's son, d'ye see."—These last words operated like a clap of thunder on the ears of poor Terry, who promised obedience to the reverend father with the most servile submission;—when the priest, addressing the company once more, enjoined them to be very circumspect in their manners, and, above all, not to get drunk;—"Arrah, now be temperate, my jewels; temperance is a very great vartue," says he, "and drunkenness is little better than a deadly sin;—so, mind my words, and be good Christians;—if you don't, why, bad luck to you." 

After concluding this eloquent and pious harangue, the good man's powers of persuasion forsook him, and, falling fast asleep over the dead body, he began to snore louder than the bass note of a cathedral organ. The husband of the deceased, slapping him on the shoulder, informed him that his horse was at the door, when he reeled out of the room with infinite difficulty, and, bestriding his garran, rode off towards his own home. 
When the priest had left the room, whose appearance, even drunk, kept them in some awe, they gave a loose to all those indecent sports, which they could not, with any propriety, act before him. It was immediately determined to hunt the brogue, a pastime peculiar to that country. The mode is

this:—one of the girls takes off her shoe, which is there called a brogue, and the company, sitting with their knees bent, forms a passage to convey the brogue from one person to another; for, in the quickness of the conveyance consists the merit of the game. 
They had not pursued their diversion for above ten minutes when a very serious affair took place. Darby, who had a vast deal of roguery intermixed in the particles of his composition, in searching for the brogue under the legs of a young woman who sat next to him, made a terrible mistake, which laid the foundation of much confusion and bloodshed;—in short, totally regardless of the suggestions of delicacy, he laid his hand upon a part of the young lady, which gave her such offence, that, with

one blow, she laid him sprawling on his mother-earth. Her lover, who was one of the party, being made acquainted with the nature of the transaction, took the part of his  enamorata,  and aimed a blow at the head of the aggressor, which unluckily alighting on the  cranium  of a drunken tithe-proctor, who was fast asleep, he awaked in the utmost rage, and, demanding the name of the person who had presented him with that friendly salutation, he returned the compliment with so much interest, that he made his assailant stagger under the blow, and fairly knocked him over an old woman, who, having taken too copious a quantity of whiskey that evening, was evacuating in a corner the foul contents of an overcharged stomach. The young woman, perceiving

the disaster of her sweetheart, flew upon the proctor, with the fury of a lioness in defence of her young, and, fastening her nails in his visage, made such incisions as drew forth the blood, which ran in torrents down each side of his face. 
Now the riot became universal.—The old woman, enraged at the treatment she had met with, seized the hair of the young man with one hand, and, catching up an earthen jug, which lay by her, with the other, made such a powerful application of it to his head, that, if his scull had been formed of penetrable materials, must have done his business completely; however, quickly recovering, he turned round, and gave the old sybil such a stroke on her face, as actually drove the remains of an old canine tooth, the only one left in her

head, fairly down her throat. The landlord interfered to put an end to the combat, when, unfortunately, in a struggle for superiority between the old hag and her adversary, they overset the stools which supported the coffin of the deceased, which, rolling on the floor, contributed to render the scene more dreadful, and so affrighted me, that, using all the expedition I was able, I made my escape from a scene that struck me equally with terror and amazement. In my hurry out of the cabin I quite forgot to pay my reckoning, and would have instantly returned to discharge it, if I had not been prevented by my fears. 



CHAPTER IV. 

Am exceedingly frightened.—Arrive at a town.—The hospitality of the poor natives.—The good nature of my land-lady's son.—Our supper.—Reflections on mankind.—A gleam of hope.—My spirits are revived by the good offices of my benefactress. 

AFTER running for a full hour, until I was quite out of breath, without once turning about or looking behind, I perceived, by the great quantity of smoke that issued from a valley at a distance, that I was not very far from a town. Emboldened by this discovery I mended my pace, and arrived there just as night began to spread her

sooty wings over the darkening world. Overcome by my exertions I sat myself down at the door of a cabin, and began to ruminate in my mind what step I should pursue.—I looked over my money, and found it amounted to one shilling and nine-pence halfpenny; a sum by no means inconsiderable in my eyes at that time. 
As I sat brooding over my misfortunes, I was accosted by an old woman, who, perceiving me fatigued, invited me into her cabin, and offered me some butter-milk to assuage my thirst. I thanked her for her kindness, and, finding her a humane, benevolent, poor creature, I told her of my distress, and unbosomed myself to her with all the frankness of innocence. She pitied my situation, and offered me every service

in her power. She requested me to rest in her cabin that night, and that, in the morning, she would inquire in the town, and see what she could do for me. I would have gone and purchased something for supper, not being willing to be too burdensome to her; but such was her spirit of hospitality that she would not permit me.—She informed me that she had buried her husband for many years, and owed her present subsistence to the goodness of her son, (whom she expected to return home from his daily labour every minute,) and to what little she could pick up by going out to nurse in the town and neighbourhood. 
Here she broke off her discourse to introduce me to her son, who now entered the room, with a scythe in his hand, the sharp part of which was bound

round with hay. As soon as he understood my situation from his mother, he told me I was heartily welcome to my bed and my supper; and, immediately taking a piece of dried beef, which hung suspended from the rafters of the cabin, cut a large slice, and, giving it to his mother, requested her to boil it that evening, with some potatoes, which he meant as an extraordinary dainty, prepared as a compliment to me, and to manifest that hearty welcome, which is universally paid by the inhabitants of Ireland to every stranger that comes within their gates. 
During the preparation of our homely repast, my kind host entertained me with an account of the town, which, he informed me, was composed principally of French families, or their descendents,

who were, on the whole, a very good sort of people; — that, as far as they were able, they gave bread to the poor; but, there being no manufactory of any sort carried on in the place, the majority of the inhabitants were frequently in very great distress for want of employment. 
By this time, our supper being ready, we sat round the table, when, being naturally bashful and reserved, I, at first, are but sparingly; but the importunities of my kind host and his mother at last removed all restraint, and, giving way to the keenness of my appetite, I made a most hearty supper; after which we all prepared for rest, my host inviting me to a share of his bed. I undressed, and, getting into bed, could hear my benefactor recommending himself to the

protection of the Almighty with the most fervent zeal and piety. 
At that moment I could not avoid reflecting upon the great difference we perceive in the dispositions of the human race, and formed a striking contrast between the behaviour of the young man and his mother, which appeared to me in a light so perfectly amiable and praise-worthy, and the tyrannic, brutal, spirit which actuated the breast and conduct of my late master:—young as I was, I strove within myself to account for such a seeming want of virtue in particular individuals; but, the subject being of a nature too deep and abstruse for my comprehension, I lost myself in conjecture, and slept till morning. 
As soon as the crowing of the cock proclaimed the return of day, my bed-fellow,

springing from his humble couch, put on his clothes, and, saying a short prayer, wished me a good morning; and, taking his scythe, proceeded to a renewal of those labours, in the execution of which his heart is happy, his fellow-creatures assisted, and his Creator pleased. 
After the departure of my friend I composed myself to rest a second time, and was awakened in the morning by my kind benefactress, who informed me, with great satisfaction in her countenance, that she believed she had heard of a place that would suit me. A physician of the town had parted with his servant the day before, and wanted a smart boy to supply his place.—"To be sure," added she, "the doctor is reckoned in the town but an odd sort

of a man, and is not over liberal to his domestics; but he is looked upon as extremely skilful in his profession, and has a vast deal of practice all over the country.—Now," says she, if you are agreeable, I will speak this morning to my friend, who shall take you with him to the doctor." 
I was overpowered with joy at the news, and eagerly thanked the poor woman for the interest she had taken in my affairs; and, getting out of bed, I dressed myself with all possible haste, to be ready to attend my new master whenever I should be called upon. 



CHAPTER V. 

My benefactress returns.—I am introduced to my new master.—Entertain no very advantageous idea of him.—His treatment of a patient with a broken leg.—His singular ideas respecting human nature.—Jokes ill-timed, when at the expence of the miseries of our fellow-creatures.—A striking specimen of my master's oeconomy. 

AFTER waiting about a quarter of an hour, Mrs. Commins (for that was the name of my kind hostess) returned, bringing with her a young man, whose face, if it is to be considered as the index of his mind, proclaimed him to be remarkably stupid.—"Here, Mr.

Rhubarb," says she, at the same time presenting me to the person in question, "is the young lad that I was speaking about;—if you will use your interest with Dr. Calomel, and get him into his service, I shall be for ever obliged to you:—I have conceived a great partiality in his favour, and I have no doubt but the doctor will think himself obliged to us both for the recommendation." 
The young man asked me if I was willing to go to service; and, upon my answering in the affirmative with great readiness, he desired me to come along with him, and he would do my business. Mrs. Commins thanked him, and said, that heaven would reward him doublefold for the kindnesses he was shewing to a poor orphan, helpless and

unbefriended.—I took my hat, and prepared to follow my conductor, but not before I had seized the hand of my benefactress, and, wanting words to thank her for such an instance of friendship and generosity, I bathed it with my tears. She kissed me, and bade me be a good boy, under which injunction I departed, and, with sear and trepidation, followed Mr. Rhubarb to the house of my new master. 
Upon our knocking at the door, and inquiring for Dr. Calomel, we were desired to walk into the parlour. When we entered, I saw this grotesque son of Esculapius reclining in an arm-chair, amusing himself with the perusal of that celebrated key to the sublime parts of natural knowledge, called Aristotle's Masterpiece. As his person struck me, in

the  tout ensemble,  as strongly partaking of the singular and ridiculous, I shall attempt a description. 
He appeared somewhat turned of fifty, in stature about four feet nine inches, with a complection so nearly approaching to the Ethiopian, that I should have concluded his parents were natives of Africa, and subjects of Prester John, if I had not been assured, upon credible authority, that they were an honest couple of French refugees, who had fled into Ireland in consequence of the edict of Nantz.—His nose was short, with a round nob at the end, somewhat like the top of the handle of a kitchen poker; and his face was farther embellished by an enormous wide mouth, which appeared, when he laughed, to be bounded only by his ears. — His eyes

were small and black, yet piercing and animated; and, when he rose to receive us, I perceived that his knees formed two angles, which crossed each other alternately as he walked.—He had on a large thick woollen night-cap, tied under the chin; a camblet gown, manufactured in the good days of Queen Elizabeth; a black waistcoat, embrowned with snuff, which he took in prodigious quantities; leather breeches, unbuttoned at the knees; coarse worsted stockings, and a pair of green slippers, that seemed, by their patches and appearance, to have been in the doctor's service, a considerable time.— 
"Aye, aye, Master Rhubarb," says the doctor on our entrance, "what, you have brought me another patient, I see;—I suppose, now, his constitution

is ruined by some ignorant member of the faculty, and you have brought him to me to patch it up as usual.—Tell me, boy," says he, addressing himself to me, and putting on his spectacles, "how long have you been ill?—what's your disorder?— come, shew me your tongue."— Doctor," says my friend Rhubarb, as soon as the astonishing loquacity of the physician would give him an opportunity to put in a word, "you are deceived; this boy is not ill,—he is come to offer his services to you, to supply the place of the lad you have discharged."—"Oh! ho!" says this retainer of death, evidently disconcerted at his own want of penetration, "that alters the case! no, no, I'll be sworn, if he is come to serve me, that he

is well enough, egad;—he will eat his allowance, without much solicitation, I'll be bound for him.—There's that rascal, Peter, I turned off, would eat you his pound of solid beef at a sitting, with as much ease as I can draw a tooth! — damme if a dozen such hungry dogs would not breed a famine in the country!—Well, where the devil did you come from?" says he, turning to me, "where did you live last? who'll give you a character?"— Here my friend Rhubarb proceeded to tell the doctor my situation, and concluded with observing, that he believed I was willing to leave the articles of wages entirely to his generosity. At the mention of the last article a smile of complacency stole across the visage of the physician, who, stroking me over

the head, assured me, that, if I became his servant, and behaved myself well, I should never want for proper encouragement. Upon my making a low bow, and thanking him, he bade me wait till he should have occasion for me. 
Now Rhubarb and the doctor, having seated themselves by the fire-side, began to discourse upon the effect of the several medicines that had been administered to Calomel's patients in the course of the preceding week. By the course of their observations, I soon discovered, to my utter astonishment, that gambouge and brick-dust, Scotch snuff, chalk, and vinegar, made up the principal part of every recipe that the doctor had issued for the last twelve months, totally regardless of the disorder, whether

gout, fever, lax, pox, or consumption. 
After this conscientious physician and his understrapper had diverted themselves, at the expence of their patients, for some time, an object of misery was brought in to the doctor for advice; upon which Mr. Rhubarb, wishing him a good morning, took his leave, and my master proceeded to examine the object alluded to, which was a woman turned of forty, with a pallid, emaciated, countenance, and her body and legs so swelled with a dropsy that the members of her frame seemed to have lost all proportion. 
When the doctor had surveyed her for a few minutes, he very gravely asked the poor sufferer what she wanted with him: she replied, she hoped, that,

under heaven, he would cure her.— "Cure you, woman!" replies Calomel, "why, you're in a confirmed dropsy!" —"And is there no relief?" added she, in a tone fraught with anguish and despair.— "Relief! aye, aye, I can relieve you, woman, as to that matter."— If you can," says the woe-begone wretch, lifting up her hands as in the act of prayer, "I pray that God may reward you hereafter."—"I have no sort of objection to a reward  here  as well as hereafter; — you understand me."— Oh! sir, I do," replies the unhappy being; "but, alas! I am poor, and have not the power;—I was left a widow, with a large family of young children, who will incessantly pray for your health and prosperity."—"Aye, aye, my good woman," replies the disciple

of Galen, "I am much obliged to you for the intention; — but, d'ye hear me? get home as fast as you can, and I'll contrive to give you some ease in about a couple of hours." —"In two hours, sir!"—"Yes, I'll come and tap you, as they do the small-beer barrels, though, I'm afraid, for one quart of water I shall find two of whiskey; is'nt so? — Damme, I should not be surprised if the whole country was in a dropsy; for three-fourths of their existence are dedicated to drinking and sleeping." —"Oh! sir," says the emaciated object, wounded to the quick at the cruel insinuations of my master, "I assure you I never drink spirits of any kind." —"Oh! Lord, no, to be sure," says the doctor, "you drink whiskey!—

I beg your pardon; — no, no; — whiskey, indeed!" says he, "it's water!—yes, yes, you are all damned fond of water;—you sleep with water, get drunk with water, and wallow about the streets like a sow in a dunghill! — however, good woman, go about your business." — Upon which the poor creature took her leave of this physical brute with tears in her eyes. 
She had scarce got out of the doors, when another unhappy claimant made his appearance. This was a young man, who, in thatching an outhouse in the neighbourhood, by his foot slipping, had fallen from the top of the building into the street, and broke his leg, and was conducted to the house of Calomel to have it set. (For the doctor was

not only the principal physician, but likewise surgeon and man-midwife to half the county.) After they had placed the unfortunate young man in a chair, my master began to examine the limb; while he was performing of which the poor fellow looked most wistfully in the face of the doctor, as if anxious to learn his fate by the turn of his countenance, which Calomel perceiving, he heightened the apprehensions of his patient by exercising the most significant grimaces, (in the whole art of which he was an adept,) and, at times, shaking his head, as if seriously alarmed about the consequences of the fracture; which he continued to exercise, with other gesticulations, until he had worked upon the fears of the poor lad so far, that, in the utmost vehemence

of despair, he asked the doctor if he must lose his leg? to which question Calomel replied in doubtful terms. He began to bewail his misfortune, which the doctor treated as a jest, telling him, at the worst he could but lose his leg, which was a circumstance not so unfortunate as was generally imagined, when he considered the great savings that are made in the articles of shoes and stockings. With a number of witticisms of this nature he entertained the miserable wretch (who lay writhing with pain) while he set his limb; after effecting which he consigned him to the care of his friends, promising to call the next day to see how he went on. 
By this time I had conceived the most unconquerable aversion to my new

master, both for his principles and practice;—I looked upon him as a monster, utterly devoid of humanity, callous to the misfortunes of his fellow-creatures, and a dishonour to his profession. 
After the doctor had dispatched the young man with the fractured limb, he gave orders that he would see no more paupers that morning, as the hour had arrived when it was usual for him to visit his out-door patients. While he was adjusting his wig, which forms no inconsiderable part of a physician's consequence, his friend Rhubarb paid him a second visit. I soon understood that this gentleman was as necessary to the doctor's operations as his right arm.— I learned, from a neighbour, that Mr. Rhubarb was an apothecary in the town, whose practice had been exceedingly diminished

by the irregularities of his conduct, and more particularly by a small mistake which he made in the recipe of another physician, which was no other than administering an emetic, of three times the strength prescribed, to a young lady, the consequence of which mistake was no less than the instantaneous death of the patient. As the physician partook of the odium affixed to the blunder of the apothecary, and getting into disrepute, it proved a matter of the most satisfactory nature to the malignant spirit of Calomel, who secretly rejoiced at the event, inasmuch as it was a deep wound to the reputation of the physician, who had heretofore been a formidable rival to Calomel upon all occasions. 

After giving me directions to tell any person who might call upon him that he should return in the afternoon, this redoubted son of Galen, attended by his medical assistant, set out to visit a patient, who resided about four miles from the town, and to whom Calomel wished to introduce Rhubarb as the apothecary;—for what reason, it is presumed the reader is already sufficiently acquainted. 



CHAPTER VI. 

An account of my master's study.—The arrival of a relation.—My master's ideas of human wisdom.—A picture of the physician's oeconomy.—The dinner.— My master's exordium, by the way of grace.—His description of the town.— He indulges his malice at the expence of his veracity.—His propensity to humour.—The departure of the guests. 

AFTER the departure of the doctor, and his brother in iniquity, I began to take an accurate survey of the apartment, which he dignified with the name of Study. In a glass case, in the middle of the room, there was, preserved in spirits of wine, a great variety

of uncommon animals, insects, and reptiles, and, among the rest, a human foetus, as it is situated in the womb after four months conception. 
On the shelf, over the fire-place, were the sculls of an European, an African, and a monkey, by a comparison of which I perceived that there was a strong resemblance between the  cranium  of a man and that of a monkey; but particularly so in that of the negro, the formation of which approached so near to that of the monkey that there was scarcely any difference, except in the disproportion of size. 
His collection of books consisted principally of Cheselden's Anatomy, a few numbers of the Medical Magazine, Cowper on midwifery, a French edition

of Boileau's poetry, a Latin dictionary, and an old bible. 
In one corner of the room stood a wig-block, unoccupied, and, in the other, a case, containing an imperfect skeleton, at the first sight of which I thought I should have dropped dead with affright. 
On a peg, in the middle of the room, hung a scarlet cloak, which, with six crazy chairs, a folding-table, and a draught-board, completed the furniture of the room. 
When I had satisfied my curiosity, I began to peruse Cheselden's Anatomy, and was amusing myself with looking at the cuts, when I heard a loud double knock at the door, on opening of which a gentleman on horseback inquired if Dr. Calomel was at home; to which I

answered in the negative, but at the same time informed him, agreeably to his directions, that I expected him home to dinner; upon which the gentleman desired me to acquaint my master that his name was Rapine, and that he should do himself the favour to dine with him on his return from the inn, where he was going to put up his horse. 
The stranger had not been gone from the door above half an hour when my master arrived, accompanied by his zealous adherent, Rhubarb. He inquired if there had been any persons wanting him since he went out; upon which I informed him that Mr. Rapine had been there, and acquainted him with his intention of dining with him. 
At the mention of the name of Rapine, I perceived the muscles of Calomel

to distend with smiles of secret satisfaction:— "Od-so," says he, turning to Rhubarb, "a cousin-german of mine from the north, from whom I have great expectations! — he is a great wit, a manufacturer of  bons mots,  and a very tolerable hand at the violin;— he has amassed a prodigious sum in the service of his majesty."—"What, he's been some naval or military officer, I suppose," says Rhubarb, who, after a life spent in honourable fatigue, has retired, to end his days in peace and solitude beneath the shade of his own laurels."—"Why, not exactly so," replies the doctor, my cousin has never had the honour of exposing his person on the quarter-deck of a man of war, or in defending a battery against the approaches

of an enemy; no, my dear Rhubarb, excuse me, we have no such fools in our family;—Mr. Rapine has served the king, it is true, but, between ourselves, where he studied the interest of his majesty in one instance, he was wise enough to take care of his own in ten;—you understand me," says Calomel, putting his finger to his nose, with a significant leer. —"Oh! perfectly well," says the pliant apothecary.—"He was, for the space of seven years," continues the doctor, a collector of excise at —, in the county of —; but some of his indirect practices being discovered, in spite of all his cunning and address to hide them, he was, in consequence, removed from his employment, but not quite destitute, as my indefatigable

relation had taken care to amass a fortune in that situation, amounting to very near twenty thousand pounds." — Upon which my master retired into the kitchen, to give orders for something extraordinary for dinner that day, which he intended should be in a style of elegance, superior to his ordinary mode of living, on purpose to entertain his wealthy kinsman, and left poor Rhubarb in amazement at the industry and enormity of Mr. Rapine's character; from which reverie he was awakened by the arrival of the doctor's guest, who entered the room with that self-consequential mien, which is ever to be met with in those worldly grublings, who have gathered and scraped a fortune at the expence of

all the good and noble characteristics of a man. 
He had scarce seated himself, when my master, running into the room, and embracing his cousin, professed himself much honoured by his visit, which compliment Mr. Rapine returned with great formality and reserve. The doctor seized his hat, whip, and coat, with that kind of obsequious officiousness which would be highly painful to a generous mind; but it was what the doctor well knew would be extremely pleasing to his visitor, the bent and turn of whose disposition he had long studied with a particular degree of attention. 
The three worthies (for the doctor had invited Rhubarb to partake of the entertainment) trifled away the time in discourse until I was dispatched by the

housekeeper (for the doctor was never married, having a peculiar aversion to the female sex) to inform them that dinner was on the table; at which joyful summons I observed Rhubarb to smack his lips and rub his hands with great energy; but a visible mortification and disappointment appeared in his visage, when, hastening into the dining-parlour, he perceived the rigid oeconomy of the physician's table; however, after exhibiting some small signs of surprize, he sat down to dinner with his companions; which consisted of a tureen of meagre broth,—the scanty remains of a scrag end of a neck of mutton,—a potatoe-pudding,—a dish of  colcanon,  (which is no other than cabbage and kitchen-stuff boiled and mashed together;)—and, in compliment to Mr.

Rapine, an antiquated goose, which had seen at least three summers, was served up, stuffed with sage, onions, and garlic. 
As the goose seemed to be the most attractive object in the bill of fare, the apothecary, at the instigation of Rapine, stuck his fork in the devoted fowl, and was proceeding to dissection, when an effluvium issued from the stuffing which disconcerted the famished Rhubarb so much, that he was obliged, in spite of the voraciousness of his appetite, to forego the operation; the cause of which intolerable stench was no other than a prudent manoeuvre of the physician, who, knowing Rhubarb to be a capital hand at a knife and fork, and particularly fond of geese, had taken care to mix a little assafoetida with the stuffing,

in some measure to allay the fury of his stomach; and the expedient succeeded so well, that the astonished retailer of drugs had very nigh fainted under the influence of the noxious smell; however, after the first assault was over, he resumed his office, finished the carving of the goose, and made shift, in spite of the assafoetida, to demolish two legs, a wing, part of the breast, a side bone, and afterwards ate the rump, made into a devil, to provoke his thirst so far, that, by drinking after dinner, he might revenge the affront at the expence of the doctor's wine. 
But there he reckoned without his host; for, as soon as the table-cloth was removed, and Calomel had finished his dissertation upon the virtues of assafoetida, and the good effects of moderation

in eating, he entered upon another subject, for the benefit of his guests, which was no other than a learned account of the numerous evils, which must, of course, follow the indulgence of our appetites, especially in whatever had any relation to excessive drinking; which, he asserted, not only degraded human nature to a level with brutality, but absolutely undermined and ruined the constitution beyond the possibility of relief. The doctor intreated them not to disregard his doctrine; for he shrewdly observed, that he had been feed very highly for advice that was not a tenth part so salutary; but, as they were his particular friends, he should be sufficiently recompensed in their enjoyment of a good state of health. 

When he had finished this well-timed exordium, he called for the remains of a bottle of port, and, at the same time, a mug of ale, and a decanter of spring-water. He placed the bottle before his relation, the water before himself, and the ale before the apothecary. Upon the latter person's appearing somewhat dissatisfied at his allowance, the doctor recommended it to his palate in such terms, as his friend Rhubarb did not think it proper or prudent, at that time, to call in question, but took copious draughts of the homely beverage; the excellent flavour of which he extolled to the skies, while his heart was tormented at an indignity, which he had neither spirit nor capability of resenting. 
Upon Mr. Rapine's inquiring into the trade of the town, and the amusements

of its inhabitants, the doctor gave him the following account.— 
"P—t—g—n is a town," says the physician, "that is extremely singular, in every point of view. It owes the little importance it enjoys to the settlement of a few vagrant French families, who fled from oppression in their own country, about half a century ago, to take up their abode in a land which they despised.—Their descendents, who form the principal part of the inhabitants at the present day, have carefully preserved the little pride and narrow prejudices of their forefathers, to which they have annexed that spirit of idleness and negligence of improvement which are so conspicuous in this country; and, what renders their follies the more

lamentable is, that, from some unaccountable combination of events, the children of one-third of our people of distinction are sent here to imbibe the first rudiments of their education, which, doubtless, in a great degree establishes their manners ever after; and, to give you an instance of the qualification of the masters of these infantine seminaries, I will relate to you an account of the birth, knowledge, and endowments, of my neighbour, Monsieur de Champignon, who is considered as the pink of good-breeding and flower of all school-masters." 

De Champignon is a native of Bourdeaux, in the South of France. His father was Merry-Andrew to a  charlatan,  and his mother servant and

confidante  to a  figurante  at the opera. My neighbour (whose birth, you will admit, is not in the least illustrious) derived from his parents those qualities, the possession of which, with a small portion of industry, are sufficient to make a fortune;—you will naturally conclude I mean servility and impudence, which, as he grew towards manhood, were matured and directed by the instructions of his parents; and he profited by their admonitions so well, that, after a series of twelve years, laudably spent in studying mankind, and making himself, on all occasions, even the most infamous, an instrument of pleasure to his betters, he wormed himself into the good graces of a certain ridiculous baronet, who advised him

to set up a school, and teach the French tongue, for his perfect knowledge of which he undertook to be responsible, though, between ourselves, the baronet himself cannot speak ten words of the language.— De Champignon followed the advice of his patron, and, under his protection, has, in a few years, realised fortune sufficient to ride in his own carriage, and look down with disdain on those poor beings, who have been weak enough to be guided through life by principles of virtue and morality. 

Upon Rapine's testifying some astonishment at the account, the doctor appealed to Rhubarb, who, notwithstanding his knowledge of one half of the story to be false, nodded his head in token

of an acknowledgement of the truth. 
"As to the amusements of the town," says Calomel, "they are equally under the influence of absurdity. The better sort of people assemble every evening, at each other's houses, to drink tea and scandalise each other; after which, for want of ideas and information to discourse rationally, to kill time, they have recourse to cards, when, though the narrowness of their circumstances obliges them to play for trifles, they practise as many tricks to obtain the stake as were ever known to the most experienced gamesters in the purlieus of St. James's." 

I will tell you of an occurrence that happened at a drum, where I had the misfortune of doing penance

yesterday evening.—A Mrs. Lepoche sent cards of invitation round to her acquaintance to spend the evening at her house. Among the rest she did me the honour of an invitation. I obeyed the summons; and, immediately on my entrance, I was accosted by two of the party, a pair of wrinkled old maids, who had been soured by the neglect of mankind into an unusual severity of disposition. They attacked me open-mouthed with 'Pray, doctor, do you know that creature in the corner?' pointing to a young woman, who sat blushing with confusion at the manifest impoliteness of these hags.—'I think it extremely wrong of Mrs. Lepoche,' cries the first, 'to be asking every creature to her drums that can

boast the possession of a silk gown.'— I think she looks no better than she should be,' cries the other. At length the rudeness of these stale virgins attracted the notice of the lady of the house, who, upon inquiring into the cause of their behaviour, assured them, upon her honour, that the person alluded to was a gentlewoman; and, indeed, it was afterwards proved, upon inquiry, that the father of these malevolent virgins had been formerly coachman to the uncle of this amiable stranger. 


To sum up all in a few words;—I do most heartily hate the town and despise its inhabitants, who possess neither candour nor urbanity;—their manners are a satire upon politeness,

and their boasted borough of P—t—g—n is neither more nor less than the grave of merit, the hotbed of presumption, and an inexhaustible magazine of folly, impertinence, and virginity. 

After my master had indulged his splenetic disposition, by making a variety of other remarks, of the same malignant complexion, upon the inhabitants of the place, among whom he was living apparently in perfect harmony, this triumvirate rose from the table. Rapine and the physician sauntered out to view the town, and Rhubarb directed his steps towards his own shop, to make up a recipe for a tallow-chandler's wife, who had been delivered of three children the evening

before, and all likely to live and do well. 



CHAPTER VII. 

The ill effects that accompany the want of feeling for the miseries of our fellow-creatures.—Account of Captain Hawser.—His aversion to my master.— Their supposed reconciliation. — The physician's vanity displayed on that occasion.—His journey delayed by a small accident. — My master discomfited. — Misfortune upon misfortune.—The tragical issue of the expedition to Mount Binnacle. 

FROM my frequent conversations with my master's housekeeper, (whose good opinion I cultivated with the most solicitous assiduity,) I soon found out that the eccentricity of the

doctor's genius, and the want of humanity that too frequently attended his surgical operations, had procured him no inconsiderable share of enemies; the ill effects of which he very frequently experienced by numberless little tricks that were practised upon him, to his great mortification and disquiet. 
Before I had been quite a fortnight in Calomel's service, I was a witness to one of these impositions, which had like to have proved, in its consequences, of a very serious nature.— Among the number of the doctor's most formidable enemies was one 'Squire Hawser, who lived upon the side of a mountain, about nine miles from P—n. He had served his country on-board a man of war, and passed through the different gradations

of the service, from midshipman to captain, with distinguished honour; but, having a fortune of fifteen hundred a year left him by a distant relation, at the close of the last war, he resigned his naval command, and retired to spend the remainder of his life in the improvement of his estate, the protection of the poor, and the enjoyment of his friend. 
The captain had not been settled a month in his estate, when his groom, breaking-in a young colt, at the immediate desire of his master, was thrown from the back of the restive beast with such violence, that it was apprehended his scull was fractured. Calomel, as a surgeon of the highest repute for anatomical skill in the county, was sent for in great haste. After examining the

confusion, he treated their fears on the poor man's account with great pleasantry; at the same time affirming, that, whatever he might do by hanging, he would venture to assure him that he would never lose his life by a fracture, the comfortable thickness of his scull putting any such accident at defiance. In short, by his neglect of the miserable patient, (for the doctor considered the life of a poor individual as of no more importance to society than that of a dog,) the man languished in great torment for a few days, and then expired. 
After his death, the captain, for his own satisfaction, had his scull examined, when it was clearly perceived that an absolute fracture had taken place, but one of that nature, that if any, the

most ordinary, care had been taken of it, the sufferer might have survived, and done well. Upon this information, the captain (whose heart overflowed with the milk of human kindness) swore, that, if ever he met with Calomel, he would take the most exemplary vengeance on him for his cruelty to his domestic, whose death the generous Hawser could not help thinking was, in a great measure, unhappily, though innocently, owing to himself. 
The threats of the captain had long since reach the ears of Calomel, which operated upon his fears so powerfully (for the doctor, it must be observed, was the most arrant coward upon the face of nature) that he left no stone unturned to bring about a reconciliation.

Among the foremost of his advocates on this occasion was a Mr. Wilson, a relation of the captain, who promised the physician to use his interest with Hawser in his behalf. These circumstances coming to the ears of some wags, who resided in the neighbourhood, and who entertained likewise a most inveterate aversion to the doctor, they resolved, in close divan, to execute a trick upon him, which they effected in the following manner:—they bribed one of the captain's servants to lend his livery-coat to one of their party, whom they sent to Calomel with the following letter, which was to be delivered into his own hands, written from the implacable Hawser. 




Sir, 

AN unfortunate misunderstanding having taken place between you and me, I beg leave to inform you, that, by a thorough investigation of the cause, and the kind interposition of Mr. Wilson, it is, on my part, entirely done away, and I sincerely hope that it will be equally so on your's. 
I have to acquaint you, that I have been confined to my room for some time with that cursed old disorder that renders life intolerable to me, I mean the gout; and shall esteem it as an infinite obligation if you will do me the honour of a visit this evening, that you may prescribe something

to relieve the insupportable anguish of, 

Dear doctor, 
Your most humble servant, HANNIBAL HAWSER. 
Mount Binnacle,  April 12. 




The doctor was at home, playing a game at backgammon with his friend Rhubarb, when the fictitious servant delivered the above-written letter. When the physician first saw the servant's livery, which he well knew, a thousand fears crouded into his brain in an instant; but, when he opened the letter, and saw the contents, which he read aloud with exultation, these unpleasing ideas vanished, and joy and satisfaction sat triumphant in his countenance.—It

was some minutes before he could completely overcome the astonishment which the receipt of this letter occasioned; at last he recovered himself so far as to desire the servant to give his best respects to the captain, and to inform him that he should do himself the honour to wait upon him with all convenient speed. 
As soon as the servant was gone,— "There," says the doctor, handing the letter to Rhubarb, what d'ye think of me now? am I to consider myself indebted to my abilities as a physician for this condescension in the captain, or the kindnesses of my friend Wilson?"—"I should rather imagine that you are obliged intirely to your abilities, doctor," says the humble parasite, "which, without flattery, may be placed in the same class with a

Boerhaave, a Celsus, or an Hippocrates, and are, indeed, if properly known, the glory of your country."— You are perfectly in the right, Rhubarb," replies the doctor, your remarks are pertinent and just;—damme if I ever thought before that you had half the discernment which I find you possess." The modest apothecary bowed his head for the compliment, while my master desired me to get his two horses, Sorrel and Slyboots, saddled immediately, and to bring them round to the hall-door, while he drew on his boots. 
Whether it was owing to the consideration of the fee, which he already touched in imagination, the thoughts of being reconciled to Hawser, whose resentment he dreaded little less than

that of the devil himself, or the welltimed compliments of Rhubarb upon his physical skill, I will not pretend to determine; but it is certain, that then, and only then, for the first time in his life, a spark of liberality illumined his sordid heart, so far, that he absolutely called for a bottle of port, which he invited Rhubarb to partake of; and, as small pressing is necessary where the mind is willing, the apothecary complied; and so warmly did they sacrifice to Bacchus, while the potation lasted, that they finished the bottle in something more than ten minutes, drinking success to the faculty, and a general indisposition to the rest of mankind. At the death of the last glass, it was very apparent that the physician's understanding was somewhat wounded, when he

rose from his seat to ride with all haste to Mount Binnacle. 
But this progress was retarded by an unlucky accident, which discomfited poor Calomel very much. When I had saddled the horses, and, agreeably to my master's directions, brought them round to the hall-door, he called me in to help him on with his boots; and, while I was performing that part of my duty, some mischievous boys had contrived to tie the prickly part of a gooseberry-bush under the tail of the doctor's horse, which, in his great hurry to depart, he did not perceive when he got on horseback; but, the instant he bestrided his old favourite, Sorrel, the beast began to kick and rear up in a manner that threw the physician into the utmost terrors. However, inspired by the fumes of his

own port, he ventured to clap his spurs in the sides of Sorrel, who, being unused to such an unwelcome salutation, and irritated by the bush at his posteriors, sprang forward, and began to plunge with his rider with great fury, and presently unburdened Calomel of his hat and wig; upon which the doctor (who was a timid horseman) clung fast hold of the mane; but, notwithstanding all the physician's prudence, and in spite of his cries to the people to stop the horse, Sorrel set off in a full gallop, and never ceased till he came to the confines of a wet bog, into which, with the utmost disdain, he threw the unfortunate son of Galen, who now stuck in the filth up to the arm-pits, roaring out for help with the lungs of a Stentor. 

As soon as I saw Sorrel gallop off with my master, I followed as fast as possible, attended by numbers of the town's people, who, so far from pitying his mischance, seemed to be gratified at the doctor's nasty situation. After many intreaties on my part, and unnumbered prayers on his, we prevailed on an old woman and a travelling-tinker to assist me in rescuing the crest-fallen Calomel from the imminent perils with which he was surrounded. Immediately upon his release he kneeled, and returned his Creator thanks for his timely delivery. (For I forgot to remark that the doctor was apparently very religious, though he did not possess a single grain of charity.) 
By this time we were joined by his friend Rhubarb, who, after wiping his

clothes, helped me to place the doctor on my horse, which was quiet enough: (being a miserable beast, which he had received as part of payment from a poor widow, with seven young children, for his attendance on her husband, who had lately died in a high fever.) In this manner we re-conducted him to town, when, after rubbing his temples with vinegar, and giving him a large glass of brandy, we recruited his spirits so far, that he sent me to the inn for a post-chaise, while he put on some clean clothes and linen, determined that neither the expence of the chaise, nor the consequences of the accident, should be the means of losing so profitable a patient as Captain Hawser, which he might do, if he did not pay that attention to his

letter which a man of his spirit and consequence naturally expected. 
Being strictly enjoined to make haste, I presently returned with the chaise, into which the doctor stepped, (having already cleaned himself,) amid the gibes and sneers of a concourse of the neighbours, who surrounded the carriage.— After giving the post-chaise boy directions to drive to Mount Binnacle with all imaginable expedition, I got on my Bucephalus, and followed my master. 
It may be necessary here to inform the reader of the situation of affairs at Mount Binnacle at the time of our arrival.—Captain Hawser, who had actually been confined with the gout for a considerable time, (a circumstanee that Calomel well knew,) was, about an hour before we paid him our visit, seized

with one of those paroxysms that are attendant on the disorder, which, for the time, by the acute pain they create, almost deprive the patient of his senses, and which, working on the active disposition of Hawser, rendered him peevish, and inflamed him to the highest pitch of irritability. Added to this, he had just received an account of the loss of the ship he had formerly commanded, with all her crew, (among whom were some of his dearest friends,) in the Gulf of Florida, in a hard gale of wind. These circumstances, combining, made the celebrated descent of Orpheus into hell journeying through a path of roses, in comparison to that which the devoted, detested, but self-sufficient, Calomel was about to undertake. 

As soon as we reached the iron gates, at the entrance of the park, I rang the bell; when the porter (who had received his instructions, accompanied with a bribe) opened the gates for the doctor with marks of great respect, which Calomel thought proceeded intirely from the directions of his master; and, giving him sixpence, he inquired after the health of the captain, when the servant informed him that he was in the greatest agonies with the gout; which corresponding with the account he had received, he said,  Aye, aye, my friend, but I'll soon put him upon his legs, I warrant you. —Then, ordering the post-chaise boy to drive up to the door, he commanded me to knock, which, to do my master honour, I did so loud and so

long, that, I verily believe, it might have been heard at five miles distance. 
The captain, thinking, by the loudness of the knock, that it was a visit from a neighbouring peer, whom he expected, hurried off the sopha, on which he was lying, enjoying a little momentary ease from his sufferings, and, getting upon his crutches, hobbled towards the door to receive him. But, what artist can paint the look of Hawser, when, instead of the expected nobleman, the detested Calomel presented himself before him! — it was a combination of rage, horror, and astonishment; — his eyes darted with indignant fire, and his lips trembled with aggravation; which the poor doctor perceiving, and unfortunately attributing both that and his silence to the great anguish he was undergoing,

he walked up with the utmost confidence to the captain, and was attempting to feel his pulse; when Hawser, recovering the use of his faculties, and collecting all the might he was master of, with one stroke of his crutch (for he was a large, athletic, man) struck the exulting Calomel such a tremendous blow on the scull as felled him instantly to the ground, where he lay gasping and kicking for life, like a wounded salmon in a fishing-boat, till a repetition of the blow put a period to his capering. 
He now lay extended at his length, and speechless as Harry the Eighth in his tomb at Westminster, when this irascible commander ordered his servants to take the body to the horse-pond, which they gladly obeyed; and, taking

hold each of an arm and a leg, they conveyed the fallen victim to a large pool, in a yard adjoining the house, which served as a reservoir for all the filth and ordure of the family, (the captain following on his crutches, to see his orders strictly obeyed,) into which, without either caution or mercy, like Falstaff's fat paunch, hissing hot, they plunged the pummelled carcase of this redoubted prime minister of death, who did not recover the use of his speech until the third time of rising in the water, when he had just strength enough left to crawl to the side, and shake off a part of the mud and dung, with which he was very near being suffocated. 
As soon as he could speak, and understood his situation, in spite of his terrors, he threatened to prosecute Hawser

for damages; when the captain, damning him for his impudence, ordered the large mastiff in the yard to be unchained, which Calomel perceiving, he took to his heels, and ran for his life with the swiftness of a greyhound, and had got within a few yards of the iron gate, at the entrance of the park, when the dog seized the poor physician by the breech, and did not quit his hold till he had torn his clothes all to fragments, and had not left a piece of his breeches or a remnant of his shirt hanging together, when the servants, probably apprehensive of his losing his life, took the mastiff off, and left the miserable Calomel on the ground, gasping for life, and intirely destitute of a rag to cover him. In that state he crept into the chaise, with a countenance

strongly denoting misery and woe, and, ordering me to follow him, drove to his own house. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

Our return to P—n.—My master's lamentations.—The danger of being in too great hurry.—A battle in a bedchamber.—The doctor's metamorphosis.—The sarcastic compliments of his acquaintance.—His chagrin.—My reflexions. 

WE arrived home, after the deplorable expedition to Mount Binnacle, about eight o'clock in the evening; my master having charged the postillion not to enter the town until it was quite dark, lest his disgrace should be discovered, which he knew would be treated only as a jest by the neighbourhood,

unaccompanied with either pity or assistance. 
As soon as he had got safe into his own house, he threw himself into a chair, and, after sighing most piteously for a few minutes, began to talk very loud in the French language, which, from the small knowledge of it that I had gleaned, I soon understood to be a volley of curses, which he uttered with all the gestures of a man in the last stage of horror and despair. 
When his rage had a little subsided, by the entreaties of his housekeeper he suffered himself to be conveyed to bed, where he had not been above an hour before I carried him a bason of hot water-gruel, and found him asleep, but, at the same time, furiously agitated, talking as in a dream, and frequently repeating

the words death, damages, and damnation. At last I ventured to awake him, and, sitting upright in the bed, he seized the gruel, and, being insensible, attempted to drink it off at a draught, like so much water, when the hot beverage scalded his throat in so shocking a manner that he roared out like a goaded bull, and, laying hold of my ear, (which he squeezed without mercy,) endeavoured to throw the remainder of the gruel in my face; but, perceiving his intention, and bobbing down my head, he threw it directly in the face of the housekeeper, who had just entered the apartment to inquire after his health; which salutation made her shriek and roar, not less loud, though infinitely more discordant, than the doctor. After running about the chamber, menacing

vengeance against the author of her pain, and dancing as frantic as a drunken Welchman on the first of March, she flew to the bed, and, tearing down the clothes, (under which the doctor had retreated from her fury,) began to belabour the head, shoulders, and flank, of poor Calomel with a pair of tremendous fists, which, for size and sinewy strength, were equal to those of any bruiser in the British dominions. After she had amused herself, at the expence of the doctor's bones, for a few minutes, he, being unable to bear the effect of her vengeance any longer, suddenly turned round, and, fastening his teeth in the left arm of this domestic Thalestris, obliged her to desist from the farther prosecution of her resentment. A parley now took place, and, mutual

apologies having passed between them, they put the best complexion they were able upon their several disasters; and the housekeeper, repairing to the kitchen to dress her wounds, left her master groaning under the severe pressure of a train of evils, which had pursued him without intermission in the course of that memorable day, while I slunk to my homely bed, composed of an old mattress stuffed with straw, to seek repose in the arms of Morpheus. 
The next morning, at the usual hour, the ill-fated doctor made his appearance; but so rueful and dejected, and so black and blue with the bruises that he had received, that it was scarcely possible to know him. After giving orders to be denied to every person that should call upon him, excepting his associate,

Rhubarb, he began to practise every expedient that could heal his wounds, and render him fit once more to mingle with society; and, after being a close prisoner in his own house for a week, he began to venture abroad, having almost wholly recovered by that time his usual pertness and vivacity. 
When he first sallied forth among his acquaintance, he was soon convinced that the calamities which befel him at Mount Binnacle were no secret. One asked him, with seeming earnestness, after the captain's health; another congratulated him upon his reconciliation with so opulent and respectable a family; while a third inquired, with prodigious eagerness, after the state of his own health, which, he assured him, he heard with great sorrow had confined him to

his bed-chamber;  I heard it was a violent fit of the rheumatism,  cried a fourth; a fifth asserted it was an ague; and a sixth heard it was a fever. At last, after a sullen silence on the part of Calomel during their impertinent inquiries, he stopped their mouths by informing them that they were all right; for he really had been suffering for some days from a complication of disorders, which, from the various symptoms he had experienced, bore some sort of affinity to the different complaints alluded to. 
As it is frequently said, that we may even extract good out of evil, I was tempted to hope that the doctor's misfortunes would make him reflect upon his own want of humanity: indeed, notwithstanding the baseness of his disposition,

I saw him reduced to such a state of abject humiliation that I could not avoid pitying him; and, as I perceived that he talked less and thought more than usual, I had no doubt of his amendment. 



CHAPTER IX. 

My master's endeavours to procure satisfaction, but he is defeated.—The necessity of preserving a good character.—His attention to a female patient mistaken for gallantry.—The horrid consequences.—The sagacity of a country magistrate.—The doctor exhibits evident signs of insanity.—The arrival of his friend Rhubarb.—His notions of the administration of public justice. 

AS soon as my master was convinced that the sad issue of his journey to Captain Hawser was known all over the country, he determined to apply for justice, and endeavour, by procuring large damages against him,

to satisfy himself for the indignities he had suffered and the dangers he had undergone: but the character of Calomel was so universally despised, and that of his aggressor so generally respected, that he could not, with all his art and industry, procure a bill to be returned by the grand jury; so the doctor was reduced to the disagreeable necessity of chewing the cud of resentment in silence. 
But, notwithstanding his late disgraces, his practice, in the joint capacities of physician and surgeon, was by no means diminished, and, as man-midwife, he brought more children into the world than half the  accoucheurs  in the country. Being retained by a young butcher in the town to attend his wife during her pregnancy, (who was remarkably

handsome,) the doctor's evil genius, who never intirely forsook him, took an active part in the affair, which terminated greatly to his dissatisfaction. One morning, when he paid a visit to Mrs. Marrowbone, (for that was the name of his fair patient,) there happened to be present a mischievous gossip, to whom the doctor had formerly given offence, and who, to be revenged, took especial care to represent the carriage and behaviour of Calomel in such a disadvantageous light to the husband of Mrs. Marrowbone, that he determined to watch the doctor's motions, and, if ever he discovered any impropriety or indelicacy, on the part of the physician, towards his wife, to take ample revenge. 

One day, when the doctor had been dining at the table of an acquaintance, where he drank more than a  quantum sufficit  of wine, (for he always exceeded the bounds of discretion, in that particular, when it was attended with no expence to himself,) on his return home, as he passed by Mrs. Marrowbone's door, he stepped in, to ask her how she was. The butcher, who accidentally saw the doctor go into his house in the evening, and suspecting his intentions to be carnally, and not physically, directed, followed him in, and getting, unperceived, into an adjoining closet to the room, in which his wife was then sitting, put his eye to a crevice, whence he could easily distinguish every thing that passed. He had not remained long in that situation, when his attention

was rouzed, and his temper, (naturally jealous,) was fired, by some expressions of the doctor towards his wife, which he conceived to border upon too much familiarity. The fact is, the physician's spirits had been wound up to a high pitch of vivacity by his friend's wine and cheerful conversation, which operated so powerfully upon his actions that he could not avoid mixing a little smattering of gallantry in his dialogue with Mrs. Marrowbone, (though, to do him justice, in his sober moments he had as little desire for the finest woman in the creation as a Jew rabbi for a pork-steak,) and the doctor even proceeded so far in his indiscretions as to attempt to ravish a kiss; which the butcher perceiving from his hiding-place, he burst into the room, and, before Calomel could recover from the consternation into which this unseasonable visit threw him, made him an instantaneous present of such a violent blow in the eye, with all the force he was able, as drove the ball fairly into the socket, and so discomposed his optic nerves, that every object in the 100m seemed to the doctor to be dancing before him; but, upon receiving another blow upon the stomach, equally salutary, he measured his length upon the floor, and crept under the bed with all the dexterity he was able; whence he was drawn out by the enraged butcher, who, throwing Calomel upon his back, kneeled upon his breast, while he whetted a long knife which hung by his side, and swore, with the most dreadful imprecations, that he would instantly disqualify

the doctor from all attempts of that nature for the future; and was proceeding to put his threats in execution, when the physician, with uplifted hands, and his eyes swimming in tears, intreated the butcher, for the love of God, to desist from his bloody purpose, every now and then interlarding his prayers with crying  murder  as loud as he was able. Upon hearing the noise, some of the neighbours rushed in, and prevailed on the butcher to release him, which at length he consented to with infinite reluctance. 
As soon as the doctor got fairly out of the door, he set off, running as fast as if Satan himself had been in pursuit of him, and never stopped to look back until he was quite at his own door, at which knocking lustily, I ran in haste

to open it, and there saw my miserable master with one eye swelled as it were out of his head, and his face covered with blood and dirt. The instant he got in, the housekeeper, seeing his dirty condition, brought him some warm water to wash his face, after which he informed us of every particular, swearing that he would never rest in his bed until he got revenge for so unparalleled an outrage. 
When he had got his face cleaned, and a bandage to his eye, he flapped his hat, and walked out to a justice of the peace, who lived within a few paces of his own house, at the same time desiring me to follow him; and, after presenting himself before the justice, he made his complaint in very moving terms; upon hearing which, his worship

commiserated his misfortunes, and assured him that justice should be done him. 
The magistrate sent his servant immediately to the butcher to desire him to attend, and requested my master to sit down until his arrival. After waiting about half an hour, in came Marrowbone, with his wife and half a score neighbours; and so far was the doctor from gaining any satisfaction, that, in the course of the butcher's deposition, he had eloquence enough to convince the magistrate (who was not one of the wisest of mankind) that Calomel meant no less than to dishonour him; which deposition was strengthened by the evidence of the wife and two of the neighbours; upon which, in spite of all the doctor's protestations of innocence, the

justice advised him to make up the matter with the butcher in the best manner he was able; at the same time cautioning the physician against all such attempts for the future. 
The poor doctor foamed at the mouth with vexation, and even went so far as to charge the justice with partiality in the proceeding, which the other received in such dudgeon, that he told Calomel, if he was in the husband's place, he would not only sue him for damages, (which no court of justice, he said, would refuse on such corroborating evidence,) but would publish the story to the world, and ruin his character. This last suggestion of the magistrate alarmed the doctor very much, who now, lowering his note, declared he was willing to dismiss the parties; to which proposal

the butcher was so far from agreeing, that he demanded reparation for the injury he had received; in which he was supported by the magistrate as a matter perfectly just and equitable. The apprehension of being exposed, in that situation, to the world, wrought upon the doctor so forcibly, that he asked the butcher what sum he expected; Marrowbone replied, he would drop the affair for a consideration of forty guineas; to which proposal the physician, who would as soon have parted with so many ounces of his heart's blood, remaining inexorable, the justice interfered, and settled the sum at twenty guineas. At last, both parties agreeing, with great reluctance the doctor deposited the sum, and walked out of the magistrate's house without wishing

him a good evening, grumbling and muttering all the way to his own door, being greatly dissatisfied at the conduct of the justice in the whole transaction. 
The moment he got into his study, he walked about the room with great agitation, cursing, singing, and crying, by turns; then tore his wig, and, throwing it on the floor, stamped upon it with great violence; then run his head against the wall, and began to caper about the place in such a manner that I had not the least doubt remaining of his brain being disordered; so, stealing out of the room, I locked the door on the outside, resolving not to venture into the room by myself. 
After sitting by the kitchen-fire for about a quarter of an hour, the housekeeper

(who had been out to procure some necessaries for the family) coming in, I told her the story, which terrified her almost as much as myself. It was at last resolved that I should go for Mr. Rhubarb; but he happened, fortunately, to knock at the door just at that instant. When we unlocked the door of the doctor's study, I found him with his head upon the table, fast asleep, and snoring comfortably without his wig.— Mr. Rhubarb expressed great sorrow at seeing his friend and patron so maltreated, and in so comfortless a situation; but, desiring the housekeeper to bring his woollen night-cap, the officious apothecary tied it under his chin, and advised us to conduct him to bed; which endeavouring to put in execution, the doctor awoke, and, perceiving his

friend and counsellor, Mr. Rhubarb, he embraced him seemingly with great affection; at the same time the tears ran down his cheeks so copiously that my heart melted within me. Here he recounted the adventures and mistakes which had reduced him to such a pitiable condition, venting the, severest curses, and calling the magistrate by the most opprobrious epithets. At the instigation of Rhubarb, he permitted us to convey him to his bed-chamber, and there, while he was sitting on the edge of the bed undressing himself, he amused us with a dissertation on the perversion of the distinction of right and wrong, and the glaring folly of the legislature in appointing individuals to be magistrates, whose educations are narrow and whose principles are vulnerable; and,

to do him justice, he handled the subject with a degree of ingenuity and knowledge, that sufficiently proved him in the possession of a keen and strong understanding. 
Now we left him to enjoy a comfortable night's rest, of which, indeed, he had great occasion, not only to recruit his spirits, but his strength, to encounter a series of unnumbered calamities, which the flinty-hearted destinies had decreed should torment him on the following day. 



CHAPTER X. 

Fresh storms gathering for my master.— The necessity of being modest in public conversation.—Give a dog an ill name, and you had better hang him.—The arrival of a Scotch physician.—The inefficacy of lying.—Calomel invited to a supper.—Falls into a pit of distress.— A certain cure for black eyes.—One evil springing out of the womb of another.—The climax of human wretchedness. 

A Large party of Highlanders arriving in the town, on their way from Dublin to Cork, and some of the officers spending the evening at the inn with the gentlemen of the place, a

thought came into the head of a pleasant fellow, who was one of the party, to put another trick upon Calomel, which, if it succeeded, and was carried on properly, would effectually reduce him so far that he would never be able to hold his head up again, or mortify him to that degree as to oblige him to quit the town; a circumstance most ardently wished for by a majority of the inhabitants, to whom he had made himself exceedingly obnoxious. 
The scheme was built upon the doctor's frequent boasting in company, that, when he was at Glasgow, prosecuting his medical studies, he was signalized and honoured for his peculiar industry and penetration, and that one of the most eminent physicians of that country, a Dr. Macgreggor, kept up a

constant correspondence with him ever since. 
Now it was resolved, that a Captain Crazy, a determined enemy of the doctor's, and one of the party, should dress himself in a Highland plaid, and, being an excellent mimic, should pass for the surgeon of the regiment, and nephew to the Scotch physician in question;—and that he should send his compliments to Dr. Calomel, and acquaint him, that he would do himself the honour of paying his respects to him before he left the town. Accordingly the card was written, and a man dispatched with it to his house. In the mean while Crazy, and another of the party, put on the Highland uniform, and, agreeably to promise, after disguising their faces, went to Calomel's, and knocked

at the door. The doctor, on any other occasion, would have been proud to have received such a mark of respect from the nephew of so great a man; but, circumstanced as he was, at that time, with a most tremendous black eye, he would most willingly have declined the interview; however, they came in so unawares, that they absolutely took the doctor by surprise, who was then in the act of adjusting himself to hide his disgrace as much as lay in his power. After the first ceremonies were over, and Calomel had made the necessary inquiries after the health of his friend Macgreggor, the pretended surgeon asked him how he came by so disagreeable an accident as that of a black eye. The question abashed the doctor at first; but, assuming an air of

indifference, and a spirit of lying being among the rest of his qualifications, he told them, that, having occasion to get up in the night, in attempting to go down stairs his foot slipped, and he fell from the top to the bottom, and struck his eye against a stool, which his servant had carelessly left there after winding up the clock, which stood at the bottom of the stairs. They pitied his case, and, to all appearance, swallowed the doctor's circumstantial lie with great credulity. Upon the pretended surgeon's begging leave to look at it, Calomel complied with a great deal of unwillingness; and, upon the parties going to the window to examine it, the surgeon took care, while he was feeling the swelling, which was prodigiously large and inflamed, to give him such

pinches, and handled the business so roughly, that Calomel, in spite of all his endeavours to the contrary, could not help wincing, and grinding his teeth with torture; till, at last, the pretended nephew of Macgreggor gave him such a confounded pinch, that the doctor, losing all patience, bellowed like a stuck pig; exclaiming, with great vociferation, that he could not endure more pain in an amputation; upon which the other asking pardon, the doctor appeared perfectly satisfied. 
After some desultory discourse upon the state of physic in Scotland, a subject which the doctor's visitor avoided as much as possible, they parted, but not before the physician had made a promise to spend the evening at the inn: when Calomel started some objections

relative to his eye, the other assured him, upon his honour, that he was in possession of the means of curing it in the course of a single night, and that he would do himself the pleasure of removing so ungentlemanlike and perplexing a disfigurement that very evening; for which kind and polite intention Calomel professed himself very happy. 
At the appointed hour for meeting in the evening, the doctor's newly-acquired friends, accompanied with two or three more implacable foes to Calomel, properly disguised, and a few Scotch officers, assembled together, expecting the physician every minute. 
I must inform my readers, that my master was so elevated with the idea of his own consequence, which he conceived

to be greatly heightened by the late visit, that he made a point to go among his acquaintance, and publish the circumstance as a matter materially resounding to his personal honour and character; he set forth the respect that was entertained for his abilities in other countries, and, at the same time, hinted how much the people of P—n were indebted to him for residing among them. 
The time arriving that he was to repair to the inn, he put on his best wig, nicely powdered for the occasion, and curled as close as a cauliflower; and, getting into a chair, he proceeded to the rendezvous with a heart as light as pride and vanity could make it. When he entered the room, the gentlemen rose, and insisted upon his taking the

chair at the upper end of the table, which, with a little affectation of modesty, he accepted. After a dozen glasses had circulated briskly, the doctor's unbound eye began to twinkle; and not intirely without a cause; for these wags had slily infused a quantity of brandy into every glass of wine the doctor drank; while he, proud of exhibiting his talents for disputation, was holding forth to the rest of the company, and explaining, with great energy, the origin and exertion of the muscles. 
At last, conceiving a disrelish for the wine, a large bowl of punch was ordered, which they placed before Calomel, who, bending over the bowl, lost his equilibrium, and, falling along the table, was, with some difficulty, replaced in his chair by his comic companions;

but not without disordering his wig in such a manner that it was impossible he could put it on his head any more that evening; for the truth is, when the doctor first lost the center of gravity, in plunging forward, his nicely-dressed wig fell into the punch-bowl, where it was swimming for a period of five minutes, while they were fixing the physician in his presidential chair; but, the doctor complaining that his head was cold, they called for a red night-cap, which the landlord brought, and with that they protected his seat of knowledge and medical skill from the assaults of the cold air. 
It was now proposed by the fictitious surgeon to apply the remedy to the doctor's eye, which he assenting to by a nod, being intirely overcome with liquor,

they tipped the landlord a wink, who went out, and returned in a few minutes with a plate-full of guts, taken warm from a sheep that was just killed, which putting in a coarse cloth, they applied, smoking hot, to the maimed eye and cheek of the passive doctor, who, having fallen into a sound sleep, lay snoring in his chair, drunk, and insensible to all their kind exertions for the restoration of his health. 
After having tied on this never-failing plaster for his recovery, which, moderately speaking, covered three-fourths of his head, and enjoying the brilliant success of their design for some time, they ordered a chair, and, putting the physician into it, sent him home dead drunk, with his wig dropping wet in his lap before him. The chairmen (who had been previously

made tipsy for the purpose) had not proceeded far with their burden, when the foremost man, stumbling against a stone which lay in his way, lost his hold, and, falling to the ground, the chair dropped with him, the door of which, being unfastened within, flew open, and lodged the black-visaged doctor in the mud. The chairmen, being almost as drunk as their employer, and not perceiving his disaster, got up, and made the best of their way to the doctor's house. Hearing the chair stop, I ran with the light; but, guess our surprize when we found the vehicle unoccupied! — The chairmen were thunderstruck; and all the housekeeper and I could get out of them was, that they were certain the doctor got into the sedan at the inn. 

In the midst of concern for our master's safety, it was determined that I should go to Mr. Rhubarb, and endeavour, with him, to discover what had become of the doctor. Accordingly, I went and called Mr. Rhubarb, who, imagining it was a summons to attend some person that had been taken sick in the night, jumped up, and, dressing himself with uncommon alacrity, inquired who was unwell; but, seeing me, and understanding that the doctor was missing, he appeared very much alarmed, and, taking hat, cloak, and stick, we sallied forth in quest of this medical child of innumerable misfortunes. After rambling about the town for above half an hour, to no purpose, and wet to the skin, (for it rained extremely hard,) we resolved to give over the pursuit; but,

on turning the corner of the market-place, we heard a noise, much resembling that of a man groaning, and, going up to inquire the cause, there we found the pitiable Calomel (for, by this time, the wet and cold he had sustained awaked him) groping in the surrounding mud for assistance; and he was so disfigured, that, had it not been for his voice, we never should have recognized his person. 
After getting him upon his legs, Rhubarb called up a poor woman, who lived hard by the place, and, when she had struck a light, we guided this miserable disciple of Hippocrates into the house. When Mr. Rhubarb first saw his head, he burst into an exclamation of "Ch—t J—s! what have we here! sure, this is not the doctor!"—"Yes,

but it is though, you sneaking clyster-pipe son of a whore," cries Calomel, at the same time belching most immoderately, "if it isn't me, who is it? tell me that;—d'ye hear?"— I beg your pardon, doctor," cries Rhubarb, "I did not mean to give you offence, upon my honour."—You and your honour may be damned together;—d'ye hear me now?—here's a pretty scou—ou—ou—ndrel to be talking of honour, that sells the powder of rotten wood for julep, and ground oister-shells for  magnesia alba. "—"I scorn your words," replied the other.—"You and your scorn may go to the devil together;" said the doctor;—"d'ye hear me now, you dried eel-skin? — Here, house, bring me some brandy, for I'm cursed dry." 

The apothecary and I stared with astonishment at each other, and could scarce believe we were in our senses; but, perceiving his head tied up, and the wildness of his eye and discourse co-operating with our fears, we took it for granted, that, by some shocking accident the scull was fractured, and that the  sensorium  was wounded by the contusion; however, with the assistance of the old woman of the house, we made him three quarts of whey, which forcing down his throat, we perceived his reason to return apace. 
When he came a little to himself, Rhubarb ventured to inquire what was the cause of his head being bound up in so extraordinary a manner. All we could gather from his answer was, that it was put on by Dr. Macgreggor.—

"Who is Dr. Macgreggor?" cries the other.—"Oh! by my soul," says the doctor, one that will flog all your country for knowledge, my lad of physic; — Galen and Esculapius were but fools to him;—it's he has the notes for it." 
By this time, the copious draughts of whey that he had drunk, mixing with the vile dregs of the spirituous liquor in his stomach, caused an insurrection in that sensible part of the frame that put a total stop to Calomel's eulogium on his friend Macgreggor; and, after turning up the white of his eye, with great energy, his face appeared as agitated by strong convulsions, which lasted until nature, harrassed with such a combination of liquids, impelled the physician to discharge the nauseating load; which, lighting on the neck of the old woman,

(who was stooping to re-kindle her fire,) ran down her back and shoulders like a torrent, and made her stink more offensive than a bog-house in the dog-days. Rhubarb all the while kept slapping his patron on the back, who, giving a violent strain to bring up the last remains of the filthy cargo, burst the bandage which tied the plaster to his eye; when the guts and garbage, falling to the ground, fairly suffocated a young kitten that was fast asleep at the doctor's feet. When Rhubarb saw the ingredients of Macgreggor's plaster, he lifted up his eyes in astonishment; and Calomel, confounded and chop-fallen, swore, that he would never receive the soft blessing of rest, until he had wreaked his resentment on the caitiff who had used him so unworthily. 



CHAPTER XI. 

The doctor passes a night of great uneasiness.—Seeks his persecutor in the morning.—Is guilty of a small mistake, which throws him into a paroxysm of despair.— Receives a threatening letter.—To avoid public shame, he retires to a relation's, and I am discharged from his service. 

WHILE the doctor and his friend Rhubarb passed the remainder of the night at the old woman's cabin, that they might not fail to find out Dr. Macgreggor in the morning, (which, if they went to bed, they apprehended might be the case, as the Highlanders were ordered to assemble in the morning early at the market-place, for the purpose

of proceeding on their route to Cork,) I was dispatched home to bring a change of clothes and linen, that my master might be properly dressed, to call his brother in physical iniquity to a proper account for the affront he had received at his hands over-night. On my return, we used every expedient to array him properly; — we stripped the doctor stark naked, and washed him with buckets of water from head to foot; and, after rubbing him dry, by frequently giving him whey and butter-milk recovered him pretty tolerably; so that, when Aurora thought proper to give birth to a new day, the physician had almost totally surmounted his late indisposition, and, considering every thing, cut a better figure, as a human being, than could well have been expected

from the variety of misery he had so recently experienced. 
As soon as we heard the drums of the Highland regiment beating a reveilly, to call the soldiers to assemble, the purified doctor began to breathe nothing but denunciations of vengeance against the supposed nephew of the celebrated Dr. Macgreggor; he swore, with great bitterness of expression, that no consideration whatever should restrain him from publicly chastising the object of his wrath. 
He had scarcely finished this menacing and terrific prologue to the approaching farce, when the old woman (whom he had dispatched to the market-place for the purpose of bringing the earliest account of their mustering) returned, to inform my master that the

Scotchmen had already formed their ranks, with every man his knapsack, and appeared equipped, at all points, for an immediate departure. 
This information rouzed the maltreated Calomel, who, attended by his faithful ally, Mr. Rhubarb, and myself, sallied forth to the proposed scene of action. My master hurried on with prodigious haste until we came within fifty paces of the market-place, when his walking became slower and slower; and it was evident, by the livid paleness of his countenance and the quivering of his lips, that he sorely repented of his rashness. When he came within sight of the soldiers, he suddenly turned about, and addressed his friend Rhubarb in the following manner, his knees trembling under him all the while:—"Don't you

think now, Mr. Rhubarb, that this action of mine favours strongly of a bloody and desperate disposition? If it come to a duel, I know I shall certainly kill him, and you must be convinced that is but little short of murder;—no, I know my own rashness;" says he, with trembling accents;—"it is an unchristianlike deed to seek revenge, and I'll go no farther." —"What!" says Rhubarb, shocked at his want of spirit, "will you permit such an outrage, committed on your person, to go unpunished!— Oh! fie, doctor!—it must not be!" says Rhubarb; at the same time giving him a shove with his shoulder, which drove the petrified physician three yards nearer to the enemy. 

My master, finding it impossible to retreat with honour, as things had been already carried so far, made the best of the embarrassment, and, assuming all the importance he was able, walked up to the commanding officer, (shaking all the way, like a man in a palsy,) and, putting his cane to his nose, asked for Dr. Macgreggor in as authoritative a tone as he possibly could assume. The officer, perceiving that he was not treated with all that respect which he conceived to be his due, looked down upon this harbinger of death with ineffable contempt, at the same time remaining silent; but, upon the doctor's repeating the question, a young ensign, who stood at his elbow, told him there was no such man in the regiment. Calomel replied, that was impossible; for he had invited him,

in  propria persona,  but the day before, and had likewise spent the evening in his company at the inn, with six officers belonging to the corps; and had received such ungentlemanlike usage, that he demanded satisfaction. 
Here the commanding officer, perceiving the mistake, assured him, upon his honour, there was no such person belonging to the regiment. The physician was thunderstruck; but, observing the master of the inn at a distance, he beckoned him to him, and asked him, before a whole circle of people, (who had, by this time, gathered round the doctor,) if he knew who it was he was in company with, the evening before, at his house.—The innkeeper replied, perfectly well;—that they were a parcel of gentlemen of the town, who had

dressed themselves, for the sake of a frolic, in the Highland uniform.—The doctor hastily inquired, who it was that called for the wine; and, hearing it was Mr. M'Neil, he appeared thoughtful for a few seconds; and, recollecting his features, and the successful effect of their stratagem, at his expence, together with the ridiculous boastings he had made of the honour of such a connexion, the blood forsook his cheeks, and he absolutely fainted away in the arms of the apothecary, being completely overcome by a strong sense of shame, grief, and mortification. 
In this state he was conveyed home before he recovered the use of his faculties, which he no sooner found himself in possession of than he tore his hair, and beat his breast with uncommon violence;

and, with the tears trickling down his face, he kneeled upon the ground, and, with the most infernal execrations, cursed himself and the womb that brought him forth; at the same time vowing an eternal enmity with all mankind. 
The perturbation of his mind was so great, that not only Rhubarb, but the housekeeper and myself, expected nothing less, from such excessive agitations, but an instantaneous deprivation of his senses. His friend declaring him in a high fever, he was put to bed, which he kept for a fortnight, refusing to take any kind of sustenance or refreshment for the first three days. 
When he had pretty well overcome the dreadful effects of the malady, he received one morning (while he was

sitting by himself, and ruminating upon the sad events of his too easy credulity) the two following curious epistles, the last of which was delivered open. 


To Dr. FRANCIS CALOMEL. 

Sir, 

THIS is to let you know, that if you don't deposit the sum of fifty guineas, under the gate that leads into your meadow at the back of your house, this evening, before nine o'clock, you shall have reason to repent it as long as you live; for we are determined to watch you the first time that you stir out of town, and, after cutting off your ears and slitting your nose, to carry you into the middle of the bog, and bury you alive,

and thereby rid the community of an arrant scoundrel; so, pray take a friend's advice, and do as you are desired, or expect the consequences from your determined foes, 



CORNELIUS CUT-THROAT, 
PETER PERDITION, and 
PHELIM O'TAWNEY. 



Feb. 17. 




After staring, with his eyes fixed upon me, in a wild manner, the letter dropped from his hands, and he exclaimed, with great emphasis and force of expression,—  Ch—t have mercy upon us!—what, these villains want first to murder me, and then to bury me alive!—aye, but I'll be damned if they do! 


It was some time before I could divert him from his reverie, to inform him that there was a second letter for him, which, with trembling hands, he took off the table;—"What! opened too!—well," says Calomel, "it can't be worse than the former, if it even came from the devil himself!" Upon unfolding it, he read as follows: 


To Dr. FRANCIS CALOMEL. 

Sir, 

YOU are hereby summoned, at your peril, to attend us next Thursday morning, to answer the complaints of Thady O'Carrol and Bryan O'Brogue, for breaking the glasses of their sedan-chair, when you were brought in a state of intoxication from

the inn, a few nights since; and not to depart the court without leave. 



WALTER JOLTERHEAD, Esqr. 
TIMOTHY NUMSCULL, Esqr. 





When he had finished perusing the second unwelcome epistle, he put it in his mouth, and began to chew it with great emotion; and, from that, and other unfavourable symptoms, we were apprehensive of a return of the phrensy, which had accompanied his fever to a dreadful degree. But, luckily, in the midst of our alarms, his friend Rhubarb called upon him; whose presence never failed to give him some solace, even in the utmost extremities of his chagrin. The doctor signifying a desire for us to retire, we left the physical twain in close consultation. 

At the expiration of half an hour, Mr. Rhubarb came into the kitchen, and told me that my master had taken a resolution to pass some time at a distant relation's of his, who lived in the next county, until his present disgrace should be forgotten in the town; at the same time telling me to provide myself with another master, as he should have no farther occasion for my services. 
After receiving my wages, which, with what I had deducted for clothes and other necessaries, amounted, in the course of upwards of two years service, to just two pounds nine shillings and seven pence three farthings, I quitted the service of this most extraordinary character, to go once more in pursuit of that most capricious of all whimsical females, Fortune. 



CHAPTER XII. 

I take leave of the family, and set forward in pursuit of new adventures.— Arrive at a village alehouse.—An account of my accommodations.—Join company with a pedlar.—Arrive at a market-town.—Experience the verity of the old saying,  It is not all gold that glitters. —Learn the true character of my companion.—Grow melancholy.—Join the suite of an exhibitor of wild beasts.—Handled roughly by one of my fellow-travellers, who causes a general confusion. 

WHEN I had taken a most affectionate leave of my fellow-servant, the housekeeper, and thanked

Mr. Rhubarb for his friendship, I departed, with my linen, and all the portable part of my wardrobe, tied up in a handkerchief, which putting at the end of a crab-stick, I threw them across my shoulder, and bade adieu to P—n for ever. 
Taking the road to Dublin, I had travelled on somewhat better than seven miles when I began to find myself in want of refreshment; and, stopping at a small town, I went into a little mean-looking public-house, distinguished from the rest by a miserable sign, which the artist meant should be taken for the venerable figure of St. Patrick, in the act of driving all venomous reptiles out of the Land of Saints. 
On my entering, I found the whole family had just sat down to dinner, and

hunger, at that time, being the greatest of the evils I endured, I resolved to take advantage of my good fortune, and remove it; so, boldly marching in, I told the landlord, if it were agreeable I would make one among them; offering, at the same time, to pay whatever he should think necessary. He gladly accepted my offer, and one and all seemed to strive who should be foremost to accommodate the young stranger; so, taking my place by a lusty black-eyed wench, (whom I afterwards found to be the landlord's eldest daughter,) I began to assail the wholesome dainties of the table, which consisted of a piece of salt pork, boiled, — some red herrings, — a profusion of potatoes,—and some griddle-bread: and indeed it was extremely fortunate that I was so sharp set; for,

while I was casting an eye of admiration towards the rosy wench that sat at my right hand, the master of the house had filled my plate so full of the best of every thing at the table, that it formed a kind of pyramid, behind which I sat intrenched, and lost in a kind of astonishment; which is not so much to be wondered at, as I had so recently left the oeconomic table of Dr. Calomel, who would not willingly have allowed me so much victuals for a week's subsistence as this poor man designed should be only a part of one meal. 
After I had allayed the cravings of my appetite, which, at the first encounter, bordered a little on the voracious, I had time and opportunity to survey the rest of the family. 

Besides the host, who was a hearty, facetious, man, and his buxom daughter, we had the company of his wife, who did the honours of her table, if it may be allowed that the fulfilling them consists in making every one around her eat plentifully; for my part, she so teazed me with her importunities to devour more than I was able, that I longed most ardently for a removal of the victuals, to get rid of the troublesome effects of her well-meant hospitality. 
On the ground, at one corner of the apartment, were three fubby masculine children, the eldest not more than six years old, as naked as when they came out of their mother's womb, surrounding a large wooden dish, full of potatoes, out of which they were eating

lustily, accompanied by the like number of pigs, who, by their noise in eating, formed a kind of concert; the grunting of the pigs serving as a kind of bass, which accorded perfectly well with the treble and tenor squalling of the children. After the swine had finished their repast, they ranged about the room with that kind of confidence and dumb pleasure, which clearly proved to me, that they did not consider themselves, by any means, as inconsiderable members of the family. 
When I had satisfied the landlord for my refreshment, I once more renewed my pedestrian expedition, still keeping on the high road to the metropolis. As I walked fast, I overtook a pedlar, and joined company with him. After a few questions had passed, on both sides, he

informed me that he was going to Dublin likewise, to procure a fresh assortment of goods; but, that being the time of the  curragh  meeting, he proposed to stop that evening at Kildare, which resolution he advised me to concur in, as the evening was approaching very fast. 
I thought his determination so proper, and moreover liking his company, that I instantly agreed, and on we jogged together, the pedlar beguiling both the time and the road by recapitulating his adventures. In the course of his remarks, he did not fail to warn me against the impositions of the world, and recounted various instances of youth coming to a bad and an untimely end, by making choice, in the early part of their lives, of vicious and unprincipled companions.

I was so well pleased with his discourse that I listened to him with very great attention, and secretly blessed myself for being so uncommonly fortunate as to meet with so good and so exemplary an associate. 
While I was attending to the sage injunctions of this itinerant Mentor, we imperceptibly arrived at Kildare. I was so much attached to my companion, that I requested him, as a particular favour, that he would permit me to mess and sleep with him until we reached Dublin; to which, after some little hesitation, he assented. 
We put up at the sign of the  Brogue  and  Shamrock;  and, having secured our bed, for the use of which, for one night, we agreed to pay four-pence, my companion (whose name I now understood

to be Dennis Blarney) made many inquiries concerning the company in the town, which we found was extremely respectable and numerous, owing to a great match that was to be run for the next day, upon the  curragh  of Kildare, for five hundred guineas. We passed away the time in discoursing on various topics, in which my friend Blarney never failed to introduce some excellent lesson of morality.—We regaled ourselves at intervals with eating bread and cheese, and washing it down with copious draughts of ale, brewed by our landlady, as thick as water-gruel, and as sour as a crab-apple. 
When we signified a desire of going to bed, the hostess stepped forward, and, extending her hand, informed me that our reckoning came to tenpence-half-penny;

when my friend Blarney, seeing me put my hand in my pocket and pull out my money to discharge it, immediately stopped me, and, paying the reckoning himself, told me, that young people, like me, had enough to do with their money besides treating their fellow-travellers.—I was so struck with this instance of disinterested generosity, in such a man, that I could have hugged him with transports of gratitude and respect. 
The good woman now shewed us to our bed, to which we ascended by the help of an old ladder;—it was placed in a kind of loft, in which we were forced to bend double, the rafters of the cieling and the floor being within three feet of each other. 

After our landlady had strictly charged us to take care of our light, which was a dried rush, dipped in grease, she left us to our private meditations. The dreary appearance around me made me undress myself and get into bed as fast as possible; which my moral friend Blarney perceiving rebuked me, in very severe terms, for lying down to rest without first returning thanks for the blessings and comforts I had enjoyed through the day. I was so confounded and ashamed, that, although it was a cold night, I got out of bed, and, kneeling by the side of Blarney, he made me repeat such a long succession of prayers, that every joint trembled with cold. At last, thinking proper to end his devotions, we got into bed, and, bein very

much fatigued with travelling so many miles, I instantly fell asleep. 
But how great was my surprize when I awoke in the morning and found my partner gone! however, concluding that he had some business to transact in the town, and that, when he had performed it, he would return and call me, I remained perfectly satisfied, and insensibly fell into another doze; from which I was rouzed by the woman of the house, who asked me, in a very rough manner, if I meant to sleep all day as well as all night; upon which I asked her what time of the morning it was;—"Time," says she, "why, it's time to go to dinner!" At which I was so startled that I got up and dressed, myself in a few minutes, and, descending the ladder, inquired if she had seen my bedfellow

that morning;—"Seen him!" says she, no, no; Dennis Blarney knows better than to be seen in Kildare by daylight; I warrant him that he's a good ten mile of the road by this time!" When I inquired into the meaning of her suggestions, she told me, that he was as big a villain as was unhanged, and had actually been tried, at the assizes in that town, on a suspicion of burglary. 
On hearing this account, which I believed as neither more nor less than a downright falsehood, I told the woman that certainly she was deceived; for I was convinced, by his behaviour, that he was not only an honest, but a religious, man: at which my landlady burst into a loud laugh, and asked me how long I had been acquainted with him;

on my replying, only about three hours before I entered her house, she said, that was long enough in all conscience; and bade me, as I valued my character, if ever I met Blarney again to shun him as I would a third-day ague. 
My stomach being, by this time, ready for the reception of another meal, I ordered some eggs to be boiled, and demolished nine in as many seconds, which, lest they should lie heavy, I qualified with a quart of ale; and, inquiring how much they came to, was preparing to discharge the obligation, when, lo! I put my hand in my pocket, and found my money had fled!—I searched one pocket after another, with the utmost trepidation; but, alas! all to no purpose. My landlady, perceiving my tribulation, inquired the cause; and,

when I informed her that I had lost my money, she asked what opinion I had of honest Dennis Blarney now; who, it seems, notwithstanding all his morality and religion, had thought proper to march off not only with my money, but likewise with two shirts, three pair of stockings, and a linen waistcoat, which I had tied up in a handkerchief, and left in the room when I went to rest. 
I was so affected at first with my loss that I wept bitterly, being left in a strange place, totally destitute of friends, and not a penny in my pocket to procure me food. The poor woman, at whose house I had lodged, took companion on my distress, and told me that I was extremely welcome to what I owed herself; but advised me, while I lived, not to be over-ready in giving credit to

the professions of men, that I did not know at first, for the future. With this wholesome admonition in my head, and abundance of sorrow in my heart, I went forth from her house, with a considerable addition to my experience, and not a penny in my pocket. 
After sauntering about the place a great part of the day, I chanced to pass by a gate-way, intirely wrapt up in contemplation on the melancholy state of my finances, when a noise, all on a sudden, assailed me, so loud, shrill, and discordant, that I verily believed it had burst the drum of my ear. After instinctively clapping my hands to my head, to feel if it had not received some alteration from the violent nature of the assault, I turned about, and saw a fellow in a livery-coat, striped waistcoat,

red breeches, and an old gold-laced hat, in the act of blowing a trumpet. This prodigious exertion (which, indeed, was not thrown away, for he made the very element resound with the alarm) swelled his cheeks to the resemblance of bladders overcharged with wind. 
When he had finished this melodious flourish, (which had drawn together a large auditory of men, women, and children,) he changed the mode of entertainment, and proceeded to give a verbal description of the wonderful sights that were brought to the town, for the mere purpose of contributing to their amusement. He conveyed his lively descriptions in a voice, that, had I been blind, I never should imagine could have issued from human organs;—he

seemed to heave every sentence from his lungs with prodigious difficulty, and with such a terrible hoarseness of accent as rendered the pleasant sallies of his imagination almost unintelligible.— "This is the time, my noble masters," roared this herald of wonders, to see the largest white bear, d'ye see, that ever was brought from the shores of Greenland!—its body is as large as a young elephant, and every claw as thick as my leg!—Moreover, besides that, we have brought a most astonishing baboon, as tall, when he stands upright, d'ye see, as e'er a trooper in the Ligonier horse!—and, for the pleasure and satisfaction of my noble masters and mistresses, d'ye see, the bear and the baboon shall dance the minivit  dilly core,  such as was

danced before their majesties at Windsor, God bless 'em!—The bear larn'd the minivit-step from Tom Surly, who kept a threepenny-halfpenny hop in St. Giles's; and the baboon was larn'd by the famous Monsieur Neverashirt, in Petty-France.—This is your time, my hearts of gold, to see the wonderful wild beestis!" 
Having, by the superior eloquence of his harangue, drawn a young woman to the feet of some steps that led to the scene of wonders, he suddenly clapped his shoulder to her bottom, (while she stood gazing, with her mouth wide open,) and, fairly lifting her up three steps, began to roar,  See how they tumble up there! my hearts; now's your time, or never! —The young woman was so confounded at her unexpected elevation,

that, for fear of turning about, and exposing herself to the mirth of the mob, she paid her money at the entrance, and hurried in as fast as her legs could carry her; and the consequences proved, that the fellow's ingenious expedient, of forcing the young woman, in a manner, to become a spectator against her own consent, was well timed; for the rest of the assembly began to ascend so fast, that, in a short space of time, the room of exhibition was intirely crammed. 
The fellow at the door soliciting me to deposit my two-pence for the sight, among the rest, with all the persuasion he was master of, I ingenuously told him, that two-pence, in coin, was, at that time, more than I was worth in the whole world. Upon his asking if I had

a strong desire to see the show, and my replying in the affirmative, he bade me follow him, for that they were going to begin. 
Elated with the opportunity of seeing the dance for nothing, and highly pleased with the good-natured offer of the man, I followed him into a dark passage, when, upon lifting up the shattered remains of an old carpet, I found myself on a sudden behind the scenes, but the place was so dark that I could not distinguish one object from another; nor should I have been able to have discovered the situation of the audience, if it had not been for the thundering clamour which they made for the show-man to begin. 
I was so embarrassed in my new sitution that I was afraid to stir, for fear of

doing some mischief, when, in the midst of a loud roar, which the spectators set up for the entertainments to commence, a fellow in the gallery, enraged at the delay, and perceiving me groping about the stage, whom he mistook for the show-man himself, threw an apple with such force as, unluckily coming full in my left eye, made it actually strike fire, and frightened me to that degree, that, attempting to make my escape, I ran directly against Master Bruin, who was sitting upon his hind legs, ready to be led out to dance by his agreeable partner, the baboon. The strength with which I ran against the bear (who had not been used to such intrusions) offended him so much, that, quickly turning round, he seized me in his paws, and, griping me with more violence

than Hercules ever did Anteus, made me bawl out  murder  without intermission, until the keeper came with a light to my rescue, and found me inclosed fast in the shaggy animal's embrace, while he was pummelling me over the head and face with his snout, which, it was extremely lucky for me, was securely muzzled, otherwise the angry brute had certainly made a breakfast on my brains. 
When the keeper made him quit his prey, by dint of many hard blows, which he gave Bruin with a long pole that he kept for that purpose, I dropped motionless on the ground, and sainted in a fit, out of which I was recovered, as I afterwards found, by an old woman, who poured a whole pail-full of water upon my face, which instantaneously

called me back to life; but the remedy was attended with one disagreeable effect, which was, that it left me as wet as if I had been dipped in the river. 
Upon my expressing some apprehensions of catching cold, the old woman desired me to go with her, and she would bring me to a fire that I might dry myself. I, at first, was rather unwilling to embrace her offer, for fear of losing a sight of the dance; but an accident happened, which made me think I could dry myself, and return to the show, time enough for the diversion.—The occurrence was briefly this: — in the general confusion, when the keeper was belabouring the bear, the baboon, who had, on more occasions than one, felt the ponderous weight of his arm, under a

notion that, possibly, his turn might be next, thought, like many an able general, that it was equally honourable, and infinitely safer, to make a retreat from an enemy in time, whom he could not encounter without a certainty of losing the battle; and, in pursuance of this resolution, he made the best of his way to the top of the building, where he sat on a cross beam, grinning with a mischievous and malignant aspect upon his master, every now and then scratching his rump, as if he meant to treat both him and his vengeance with sovereign contempt: however, the keeper, who had been pretty well accustomed to the unlucky pranks of this facetious young gentleman, procured a ladder and a horse-whip, and was ascending to bring

his excentric pupil to a proper sense of his duty, when I went out with the old gentlewoman to dry myself by her fire. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

Description of a minuet.—The keeper apologizes for the bear's want of politeness.—The musician overthrown.—I commence vagabond.—Leave the town. —Arrive at a rural hotel.—A picture of the  caravansera  and its inhabitants.— The inconveniences of going to bed in the dark.—A battle-royal.—A conference in low life.—The good effects of obedience in domestics. 

I Returned from drying myself just in the nick of time, for the dance between the bear and the baboon was then going to begin. I must own my expectations were exceedingly great, and I surveyed the progress of the brutes

with particular attention. When the baboon extended his paw to the bear, he seemed to accept it with that sullen kind of complaisance, which made it appear rather a matter of force than inclination; but, receiving from the show-man, at that instant, a well-directed thump upon his posteriors, it brought him to such a proper sense of decency and good manners, that he immediately proceeded to the front of the stage with all the grace and agility of which he was master; when a little man, with one leg, and as blind as a mill-horse, who sat on a chair in the center of the platform, began to play the well-known and equally-celebrated tune of  Sheelana-gig  upon an old violin that appeared to have received as much injury from the hand of time as himself; for, of the

five strings, (which the original inventor of the instrument thought necessary to the production of perfect harmony,) there were but two remaining. But this decrepid Orpheus seemed to think very little of such an impediment; for, labouring away with head, hands, and feet, he brought forth an infernal, grating, distant, resemblance of the tune in question; indeed, had he performed ever so well, it would have answered very little purpose; for the sportive animals, either from want of a musical ear, or stubbornness of disposition, paid so little regard to the time or the tune, that it was palpable they jumped and skipped about as disorderly as if they had been both deaf to the elegant flourishes of the blind harmonist:—but, what they wanted in knowledge and attention, they amply

made up in effect; for, during the performance, the laughter and applause that accompanied it was truly wonderful. 
At the close of the dance, some of the more intelligent part of the audience publicly complained to the show-man, that the dance which they had seen was not the dance that they were promised. The keeper replied, that he was sorry their complaint was, in one particular, but too well grounded; "for," said he, "I have been told as how, in dancing the minevit  dilly core,  they must not turn their backside on the audience; now, though I have beat the bear black and blue, as it were, my masters, I could not, for the soul of me, bring him to alter his manners, or to think otherwise

than that his breech was, to the full, as honourable as any other part of his rough composition." 
The keeper's apology for Bruin's want of politeness was received with great approbation, and he was desired to go on with the diversions.— Now, though the minevit might not be to your fancy altogether," says the show-man, you shall see a horn-pipe in style, and, damme, I defy any of the great playhouses in London to shew a better!— the bear shall perform against any of 'em for a guinea, and I say  done  first! why, it's no matter to me if they belong (I'se not afraid of my money) to Common-Garden, d'ye see, my masters, or the noted Flockton! 

At the close of this inimitable panegyric on his companion and fellow-traveller,

the bear, he gave him a violent thump on the head with a stick, which, it seems, was a signal for beginning, to which the animal had been so well used, that he immediately began to caper about the stage in a surprising manner. 
The poor sightless fiddler was playing the tune of Nancy Dawson with great eagerness, to accommodate his friend Bruin as well as he was able, when the master of the ceremonies, not intirely satisfied with his pupil's performance, lifted up his stick to the shaggy actor in a threatening manner, which alarmed him so much, (expecting the terrific motion to be followed by a blow,) that, in the endeavour to retreat from his fury, he fell backwards over the maimed musician, and so crushed his weather-beaten

carcass with his ponderous weight, that it was greatly apprehended, by all present, that a stop was put to his gut-scraping talent for ever. 
A few yards from the prostrate victim lay the remains of his once-famed violin, from whose genial womb he had so often called forth the fascinating strains of melody, to beguile the lazy foot of time, and dissipate the impressions of care from the peasant's mind:— but, alas! it was decreed that it should yield delight no more; for it lay (participating the fate of its master) in a state of ruin, and shattered into a hundred pieces. 
The lamentable situation of the fallen son of Apollo seemed to awaken the soft influence of sympathy in every breast;— the keeper having secured the bear, every

attention appeared now to center in the fiddler's catastrophe. After rubbing his temples with vinegar, for a few minutes, it was evident that he began to breathe, when a young surgeon, who had mingled with the throng, offered his assistance  gratis,  and recommended that he should be instantly bled, which operation he set about performing without hesitation; and, having tied up his arm; he opened a vein, whence the blood flowed in streams as thick and valuable as ever warmed the frame of an Irish king. The wiser part of the company, foreseeing that, if he continued to bleed in that manner for a short time longer, it must inevitably deprive him of the little life that remained, proposed binding up his arm, to which the surgeon assented; and he was conveyed to the

next house to receive such nourishment as the personal injuries he had suffered made necessary. 
The alertness and activity, I had shewn in attending upon the poor fiddler, had attracted the notice of the master of the show; who, after the business was concluded, took occasion to ask me some questions, as, who I was? &amp;c. intermixing his inquiries with some flattering compliments, such as, he believed I was a damned clever boy; and that, if I had a mind to go with him, I should live as merry as the day was long. 
Surrounded as I was by distress, and entirely destitute of a friend on whom I could, with any degree of certainty, rely for a shilling, I thought I could not, in my present circumstances, do better than close with the bear-leader's proposal;

so, striking his hand, with a hearty good will, which he held out for that purpose, he shook it in so cordial, and at the same time so vigorous, a manner, that I thought at first he had dislocated my shoulder; but this friendly salute, on the part of the show-man, was considered as a ratification of the treaty between us, which was now, agreeably to the nature of such bargains, signed and sealed to all intents and purposes. 
As my new master thought that he had gleaned the harvest of the town pretty well, it was judged expedient, in a full council, composed of him, the trumpeter, and myself, (for the poor fiddler remained so ill, from the rough usage of the bear, that we were forced to leave him behind,) to move our quarters with all convenient expedition;

so, after securing Master Bruin, (who, I was informed, was apt to be extremely unruly, unless such a precaution was taken,) and tying up the baboon in a sack, which was kept for that purpose, we deposited them, and the rest of our portable furniture in a cart, and, at exactly half an hour after three the next morning, began our march, taking our route towards the northern part of the kingdom. 
As we were tolerably well provided against the inconveniences of travelling so early, (my master having wisely furnished himself with a bottle of whiskey, and some bread baked on an iron griddle,) we proceeded as joyously as we could wish, the trumpeter every now and then favouring us with a song, the burdens of which I do not think necessary

to repeat; for, though the intention of the shrill, sense-stunning, chanter was to oblige us by his vocal essays, the composition of his favourite ditties was not any ways remarkable for delicacy of expression. 
In this care-killing disposition did we pass along until we came to a little dirty hovel, by the road-side, which, by the number of cars that were ranged before the door, we presently knew to be a kind of  caravansera,  or rural  hotel,  where animals, of all descriptions, might be entertained with bed and board, at all the hours of the day and night, for a very small consideration. It was now resolved that we should stop, and procure a fresh supply of hay for old Sorrel, the miserable horse that drew the cart and its appendages, he having long

since devoured the  quota  that was allotted him at the time we set out, and which, for his convenience, was tied in a bundle, and hung immediately under his nose, that, in order to lose as little time as possible, he might eat and work at the same instant; and, from what I understood, it was a step absolutely necessary to be taken; for he was one of those obstinate kind of quadrupeds that would have his own way, and, if once they neglected to satisfy his appetite, the devil might draw the cart for Sorrel. 
When we made our entrance into the inn, (the sides of which were built of mud, cemented with straw, and formed a sort of wall, about three feet in thickness, and covered with thatch, so old and so productive, that, in many places, it appeared more verdant than the adjacent

fields, by the large quantity of grass and weeds with which it was covered over,) I thought myself transported on a sudden into the regions of darkness; which would have been total, but for the faint glimmering of the remains of a turf fire, which pervaded the surrounding gloom from a corner of this wretched hovel. But, though it might, with great truth, be figuratively called the habitation of darkness, it was by no means the abode of silence; for a variety of voices issued from every part of the place at the same time, that formed a kind of grating discord, which may be conceived by the imagination, but is wholly undescribable by words. 
Feeling myself very much chilled by the coldness of the morning air, I ventured

to grope my way, as well as I could, to the place where I saw the fire, but had not gone three steps before I stumbled, and, falling over a large warm body, which intercepted my passage, I alighted on the other side in an instant, and unluckily pitched my head right into the face of a drover of cattle, who lay snoring upon his back, with his mouth open a foot wide. He no sooner felt the unwelcome visit than he grappled me fast by the hair of my head, which he held most tenaciously, while he struck me on the ribs with such fury, that I thought, in my terrors, he had actually drove them into my body, calling me a little dirty  spalpeen  son of a whore. Though by no means equal in strength to my adversary, I was so enraged at the smart of the discipline I had

received, that I returned his favours with all the vigour I was able; and we lay struggling together on the ground for some seconds, till a cow, (who, it appeared afterwards, was my assailant's bedfellow,) being disturbed by the affray, got up, turned herself about, and, lifting her tail, let fly without any sort of ceremony, and absolutely deluged both him and me with the copiousness of her evacuation. On the receipt of this fresh annoyance he quitted his hold, and I crept away, well pleased to escape the farther effects of his revenge, even in my present filthy condition. 
The noise which we made in this dirty rencounter had, by this time, awakened several more of the lodgers in this dreary temple of repose, from one of whom issued the following question,

in a sound which made me tremble in every limb, very much resembling that of a boatswain, with a hoarseness, bellowing through the speaking-trumpet of a first-rate man of war,— Blood and ouns, what's all this ye're at and be damned to you?—by the sweet Jasus but you are making a pretty sort of a rumpus, so you are!— arrah, mun jowl,  you vagabonds, if you're not quiet, in no time at all at all, your souls to the devil, but I'll be after running the pitch-fork, up to the hilt, in every whore's son of ye, d'ye see; — ah! by the Immaculate, into my own swate cow herself, God bless her, so I will.  — To which dreadful threat another voice replies, which, from the dialogue that ensued, we understood to be a female's, "Arrah, Darby, now,

what makes you be putting yourself into such a hell of a passion? — can't you be azy, and let 'em fight and be damned:"—when the other roared, No, you Munster bitch, I won't be azy, nor have my house disturbed at this time of night by any  spalpeen  among them."—"Hush!" cries the female voice, evidently softening her tone, "hush! my dare Darby, if you're after talking so you'll affront your lodgers, and lose their custom:"— which prudent hint was taken in such dudgeon by the other, that he answered, with great vociferation,  What's that you say, Mistress Juggy?—I shall lose their custom!—may I never ate another  peratee  but to the devil I pitch both them and their custom;—and, I'll tell you what, if you don't take a

friend's advice, and get up and strike a light immadiately, you notorious whoore of Ireland, I'll be after leathering your fat carcass like a sack, so I will.  The sound of the word  leather  had scarcely reached her ear, when (well knowing the inauspicious omens it conveyed) she leaped up from her long-feathered resting-place, and, in the twinkling of an eye, began to rake together the ashes of the turf; at the same time kneeling down, she took the candle in one hand, while, with the tongs (made of a twisted sapling) she held a piece of turf with the other, and, putting them together, she applied her mouth close to the sod, and, by the dint of a few blasts, heaved with force from lungs of no ordinary texture,

lighted the taper; in consequence of which, we could, with great ease and satisfaction, distinguish each other. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

A faithful portrait of the chamber-maid, coloured after nature.—Overtures of friendship, or small circumstances necessary to link society.—Portrait of the  maitre d'hotel. —A general alarm.— A circumstance takes place, which proves honesty to be the best policy.—After settling our accounts, we bid adieu to the retreat of filth and indigence, and follow the caprices of fortune. 

BY the assistance of the light I could easily perceive that this public hospitable receptacle was equally open for the accommodation of every kind of animal, man included. In the center of the place was erected a kind of temporary manger, under which some horses were

extended in a sound sleep; and, at their heads, their drivers were employed in the same salutary pastime, with their bodies parallel with the wall. 
But what attracted my attention most was the singular appearance of the lady, who had deigned, in conformity with the commands of her master, to illuminate the filthy hovel. Her person was rather of the shortest, being without her brogues, and besides, the lady exposed somewhat too much of the  rerum naturae  for the eye of modesty, in height about four feet and an inch;—her figure square, squab, and flabby;—and her hair (of which she seemed to have a prodigious quantity) was of the deepest tint of that obnoxious colour, vulgarly called  carroty,  part of which hung in wanton ringlets down her shoulder, and the remainder

appeared to be tied up as rough and strong as a colt's mane, under the miserable remnants of a dirty piece of linen, which (so indifferent was the fair Juggy in the ornaments of her beauteous person) served as a  succedaneum  for a cap.—Her extremities bore all the marks of a vigorous, muscular, proportion; particularly her legs, which were coarse, red, and scurfy, and had evidently a strong inclination to be bandy, and the  gasterocnemii  of which were as large and sinewy as those of the Farnese Hercules.—This delicate frame of the kind and officious nymph was sheltered from the rude winds, and more especially from the roving eye of curious and unhallowed observers, by a kind of smock, in the colour of which both black and white seemed to contend for the superiority;

and the back of which (the only part I had the happiness of surveying) reached just as low down her body as where the most skilful anatomists have thought proper to place the origin of the  glutaeus;  and from which spot commences the formation of those convenient, globular, bodies, in the neighbourhood of which the concurring determinations of the most sagacious of mankind have placed the sensible seat of personal honour.—I had just time to take this cursory survey of her person, when the spirit of delicacy impelled her to waddle towards the straw, whence she had just risen, and there I left her, gathering up the tattered remains of her motley drapery, to enable her to go through the duties and labour of the approaching day. 

As a kind of general disturbance had taken place, and some of the drovers thought it time to get up, and pursue their several journies, a considerable number had assembled round the fire, among whom were myself, the show-man, and the trumpeter. After some time employed in yawning, rubbing their eyes, and shrugging their shoulders, it was proposed to smoke a whiff before they set off; and, in consequence, a small pipe was produced, broke off to the length of two inches, covered with an incrustation of dirt, and, by the long course of service it had seen, as black as my hat. This was instantly filled with tobacco, and, when properly lighted, was handed, as a testimony of good fellowship, round the company, who, each in his turn, took a blast for about five minutes,

and then, without ceremony, unwiped, and reeking warm from the rotten teeth and gums of their associates, they partook, well pleased, refreshing whiffs from the joy-inspiring weed.— When the pipe came round to me, it was with the utmost loathing of my stomach that I accepted of the instrument of social intercourse; but, apprehensive of appearing to dislike what all my companions seemed to relish with so high a gust, I resolved to make a virtue of necessity, and, taking the pipe, and putting it to my mouth with an intention of smoking, a more offensive smell assailed my nose than could possibly have issued from the celebrated box of Madam Pandora, which was reported to contain all that was shocking and calamitous to human nature. Under

the pretence of tobacco making me sick, I was obliged to shift the pipe to my neighbour, with the best grace I was able. 
We were now joined by the  maitre d' hotel,  whose gigantic figure corresponded with the tremendous sound of his voice, being a tall, bony, man; in stature, when he stood upright, at least six feet four or five inches, with a grisly black beard; and had on a dirty woollen night-cap, and a frieze great coat thrown loosely over his shoulders. In this garb he mixed among his guests, and inquired if we were inclined to have any refreshment before we pursued our journey. Upon my master's replying in the affirmative, the kind host was busied in preparing some eggs, with a thick cut from a piece of pork that hung

in the chimney, dried to that extreme degree, that it was as void of juice, and as hard, as an oak-table; while the accomplished and love-inspiring Juggy was placing a three-legged stool before us, which was intended to serve as a table, in lieu of a better; when, all on a sudden, the whole process of eating was disturbed, and every one's attention engaged, by a noise and shrieking that seemed to alarm the very elements. 
Juggy, who had been dispatched for the purpose of learning the cause of this terrible outcry, soon returned, with her hands lifted up in wonder, and her face pale with fear, crying out,  Och hone! och hone! —With some difficulty we learned, in the midst of her lamentations, that a wild  baast  had bit off the

head of Bryan M'Snivel. Upon this information we all started up in an instant, and ran to the scene of action. 
When we got to our cart, we found a man roaring for assistance, with his head buried in the sack in which my master had tied up the baboon, and then we soon divined the cause of this bloody and dreadful adventure, which was exactly thus.—The stock of potatoes at the inn being consumed, and Juggy having forgot to provide a fresh supply on the day before, agreeably to the directions of her master, had prevailed upon Bryan M'Snivel (who, it seems, was one of her humble admirers) to go and forage among the cars before their departure, and get a small quantity out of each sack; and poor Bryan was actually

engaged in this friendly business when he met with the misfortune alluded to; for, coming to our cart, among the rest, and perceiving a sack (which had formerly held potatoes) fastened at the mouth, he ventured to untie it, and thinking, from the position it lay in, that the potatoes were at the bottom, he put in his head and shoulders, and was groping about with his left arm, when he clawed hold of the baboon, who, being awaked from a sound sleep, was so irritated, that he immediately jumped up, and fastened his fangs an inch deep in the scull of the obliging Darby. 
As soon as my master had disengaged the poor fellow from the teeth of the grinning animal, and brought his head

once more into open day, he made a most rueful and sanguinary appearance; the features of his face were totally disfigured with the blood that still continued to flow without intermission from the wounded head of the disconsolate lover; indeed, upon examination, the perforation which the angry animal had made was so deep, that, had the misfortune happened to a scull of common thickness, his teeth must have gone clear through the pia-mater into the brain; but Darby's seat of understanding was cased, very luckily, with none of those flimsy defences; for, had the baboon penetrated an inch deeper, the wound would have still remained curable. 
As the people of the inn seemed to lessen their attention towards us after

this accident, we finished our repast with great expedition, and, paying the demand, yoked old Sorrel to the cart, and set forward on our journey. 



CHAPTER XV. 

We arrive at the place of destination.— I enter upon my new employment.— The necessity of paying due obedience to fools in office.—An instance to prove that authority should be exercised with discretion.—Leave my new master.— Take up my lodging at an inn.—Character of a neighbouring justice.— Joined by an itinerant soldier. 

ABOUT ten the same morning we arrived safe, with all our baggage, at the place of destination; and, having deposited our friend Bruin and his companion in a place of safety, in a barn which my master had hired for the purpose of his exhibition, we began to perambulate

the town, preceded by our trumpeter. 
The nature of my office was to distribute hand-bills among the people, in which were pompously set forth the surprising wonders that would await their attention at the hour of seven in the evening; my master farther illustrating the description by a sort of oratory peculiar to those caterers of amusement for the vulgar; wherein he did not forget to inform them, that, for the paltry and low consideration of three-pence a head, they should see the greatest miracles that ever were brought into Ireland since the reign of Broderic, king of Leinster. 
When we had gone through every part of the place, and announced our arrival, we repaired to the barn, to make

up a temporary stage, and get every thing in readiness against the evening, that no disappointment might happen to the audience on the first night; to provide against which my master took unusual pains, knowing it, from experience, to be a matter extremely essential to our future success, as the people were generally induced to favour him with their company, in proportion to the account that they heard from those who attended the first night. 
After Bruin and the baboon were taken from their confinement, and fed, we began a private rehearsal of the feats which it was intended should be performed in the evening; and indeed they acquitted themselves so well, that their leader had strong hopes of acquiring a great share of reputation, and, eventually,

much profit, by their approaching performances: but, alas! as the wisest of mankind have been deluded by too fond an indulgence of hope, it was no wonder that my master should be deceived, who, certainly, had no great claim to the character of a man of wisdom. 
At the proposed time of beginning, the company came pouring into the barn in great numbers; at the sight of which my master was so elevated, that he declared, he believed he should receive more money, in this place, than he had done in any other, since he came into that part of the country. Upon my informing him that there were upwards of eight and forty shillings already received, he began to rub his hands, exclaiming, "a lucky hit, by G—d!"

when two stout fellows came behind the scenes, and instantly laid hold of his collar, followed by a thick-set lusty man, with a scarlet cloak and a bushy wig; who, it appeared at the conclusion, was a justice of the peace, and lived within a short mile of the town, and had taken offence, that any person should presume to exhibit their mummeries in that town, without first asking his permission; a compliment, it seems, which he had been always used to receive from every itinerant vagabond that visited his neighbourhood, from the comedian to the conjurer. 
Upon my master (who now began to smoke the business) asking, with great humility, what was the reason of his being seized in that manner, like a common felon, the magistrate answered,

contracting his brows into a most ferocious frown, "Oh! I'll let you know, you dog, the reason in proper time; I'll teach you, you vagrant scoundrel, to bring your mummery and nonsense here, to draw the money out of the pockets of the industrious poor, and to debauch, with your vicious spectacles, the morals of the young women!—take him away, I say, take him away!"—"Aye, but your reverence's worship," says another of his attendants, "what shall we do with the wild beastises?"—"What!" replies the sage pillar of the law, "has he brought the wild beasts among us too?—Oh! you varlet! I'll have you hanged, you dog, I will!—take him to jail; and, as for his monsters, we will secure them in the pound."—

I am afraid to go near 'em, your honour," says the fellow."—"Afraid!" says the fat magistrate, "afraid of what, you blockhead? why, I suppose, he has neither got a mermaid, nor a crocodile, nor the huge Behemoth that we read of in the Bible."—"No, your honour," says the other, "but he's got a bear and a large monkey." What d'ye say? a bear and a monkey only!" says the witty justice, ha! ha! ha!—I'll punish the scoundrel for being such an ass as to bring a bear and a monkey to a place that abounded in such animals long before his arrival! ha! ha! ha!" laughing violently at his own sarcastic remark, and in which the people joined him, though the joke was fabricated at their expence. 

The trumpeter, foreseeing that the end of this unlucky affair would be the total destruction of his employer, for whose interest he had imbibed a regard almost equal to his own, resolved to take ample revenge; and, while this fat terror of all the vagrant tribe was amusing himself with his jest, he unchained the bear, and, leading him slily to the back of the justice, slipped off his muzzle in an instant, and at the same time tripped up the heels of this little dispenser of the statutes, and made his escape as fast as he could; which he had scarcely put in execution, when the bear, finding himself at liberty, began to growl, which affrighted the servants of the justice so much, that they quitted my master's collar, and disappeared in a twinkling; leaving the magistrate, who lay

sprawling on the ground, to the mercy of the bear, who no sooner perceived his prey than he seized him by his posteriors, and, after shaking him for a considerable time, with great violence, ran out into the town, through the door which they had left open in their confusion, with the little man in his mouth, plunging with his arms and legs to get loose, and calling out to the people to rescue him for the love of God. After running with him, in that perilous situation, above a quarter of a mile, he quitted his hold, and, making across the fields, dropped the justice in the middle of the high road, where he was found by his servants, in a deep swoon, a short time afterwards. 
Thus, by a seemingly trivial omission of respect, was the fairest prospect

of my poor master overthrown, perhaps for ever.—What became of him after this adventure I could never learn; for, the instant that he got his freedom, he made a most precipitate retreat as well as his trumpeter, and left me once more to ramble on the face of the creation, in search of employment to procure me the means of living. 
After revolving in my mind the unfortunate train of events that had taken place, I began to think that this was not a place of safety for me to remain in, more especially since I understood that the justice was a vindictive man; and, as he was notorious for pursuing every person that he could to destruction, who was unhappy enough to have given him any umbrage whatever, what was I to expect, who was well known to be a

limb of that party which had rendered him a public object of derision!—Upon these considerations I got over a gate, at the back of the barn, and, after crossing some fields, came to a cabin, at the the door of which I saw an old man sitting, with a long staff in his hand:— his venerable and silver locks, whitened by his infirmities and the hand of time, hung in scanty order down his palsied head. I approached him with an air of the most profound respect, and, inquiring if he knew a place where I could rest for that night, he told me, if it so pleased me, that I might lodge with him; at the same time pointing to a small board over the door, on which was painted,  Dry lodging for travellers,  which, in my contemplating

the poor old man, who sat at the entrance, I had not noticed. 
After inviting me to a share of his seat, which was made of sods of earth, placed over each other, we entered into discourse, in the progress of which I found that my venerable companion had formerly been a considerable farmer in that county; but, one misfortune happening upon the back of another had reduced him at last to a state of extreme indigence, at a time of life when the comforts annexed to prosperity are most requisite. I learned that he had been driven out of his last farm, and his cattle off the lands, for a year's rent, which he had been rendered unable to pay by a fire that had consumed a large stock of corn, on the produce of which, at market, he should have been

enabled to have satisfied his landlord, who, I found afterwards, was the very individual justice, from whose resentment I had made my escape. Prompted by a desire to be acquainted with his character, my decrepid host complied in the following manner.— When Justice Guttle first came to live in the town of —, he was neither more or less than a pettifogging attorney, and, before he had resided in the place three years, had caused more mischief and law-suits, among its inhabitants, than had been known before in the memory of the oldest person living, and, to do him justice, he had rendered himself completely detestable to all his neighbours: however, having a thorough knowledge of mankind, he always manifested it, by oppressing

the poor and flattering the vices of the rich; and he succeeded so far, by making himself an active instrument in a long-contested county election, in favour of one 'Squire Bribe'em, who originally owned this manor, that he made him his agent; and that appointment was a woeful one to me as well as to his patron; for he had not been in his agency above ten years before he contrived, by one diabolical practice or another, to get the greatest part of the estate into his own hands; and this was the more easily effected, as the 'squire seldom came down among his tenantry in the country, but spent his time and his fortune in every species of riot and dissipation, till he had reduced himself so low that he was obliged to live upon a small annuity

in the South of France; while his honest agent, the justice, keeps a coach and four, kills his own venison, and washes it down every day, after dinner, with at least a gallon of claret, to assist the powers of digestion. 

Upon receiving this description of the magistrate I ventured to relate to the old man what had passed at —; which when he heard, he told me that I had acted a very wise part in leaving the town; for it was certain, if ever he got me in his clutches, he would punish me, upon one pretence or other, most severely; and I might think myself happy to get off with a public whipping, and, at least, a year's imprisonment in the county-jail. I was so much alarmed at this account that I determined to

get up at day-break the next morning, lest, by some untoward accident, it might be discovered that I was in the vicinity of the place. 
We were now joined by a maimed soldier and his wife, with a young child at her back, which she contrived to keep there by tying the two ends of her gown together, and forming a sort of bag, in which the child slept in perfect security. Having lodged at the cabin before, they all three walked into the house without any sort of ceremony, calling for some ale. After the warrior and his yokefellow had refreshed themselves, he came out with the mug in his hand, and offered it to the old man, who refused his kindness, by informing him that he had just been drinking; upon which he handed the

mug to me, saying,  Here, my lad, you will drink, I suppose, though the landlord won't.  Thanking him for his kindness, I took the mug, and drank to his good health. —  Thankee, thankee, my lad,  said he; and, sitting down between me and the reverend host, he began to make some remarks upon the fineness of the evening; at the same time telling us, unasked, that he had travelled a good forty miles that day, and, being damnably tired, why, he did not care how soon he began to take a comfortable snoose. 

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 





VOL. II.

CHAPTER XVI. 

Description of the family.—The soldier gives an account of his life.—He endeavours to prove that honour is a sufficient substitute for happiness.—I retire to bed.—Join the soldier and his family.—More ways of living than one.—The soldier's stratagems to eke out a scanty pittance.—Their success. 

AS soon as we had all retired within the cabin, our company was reinforced by the arrival of the farmer's daughter, who had just returned from a neighbouring fair, where she had been to sell some spun-yarn, in which employment her father and she passed the greatest part of their time, in order to make a small addition, by their industry, to that pittance, to which it had pleased heaven to reduce them. 
When we had assembled round the hearth, the loquacious soldier, taking some tobacco from a leather pouch, which he carried in his pocket, between his finger and thumb, and depositing it in his lower jaw, between his lip and his teeth, began to inform us who he was, and the reasons that had induced him to pay a visit to that part of the country.—"When I first took it in my head to enter the army as a private," says the soldier, "I was about the age and size of this here lad," at the same time giving me a violent pat on the head.—I remember the time just as well as if it was but yesterday, though, may hap, I haven't made many a hard campaign since that time;—but no matter for that, every man isn't born with a silver spoon in his mouth; and, if so be as how I've done my duty, why an't I as good as another? hey, father!" says he, addressing himself to the host;—"but, damme, what signifies?—it will be all the same a hundred years hence, as Corporal Crab used to say.—Well, as I was saying, when I listed in the army, it was in the month of June, at Clonmel, in the county of Tiperary, and a fine body of men our regiment were, damme, as ever faced an enemy in the field of battle.—But this won't do, by G—d!—ram me into a ginshop (as our corporal used to say) but I'm growing confoundedly dry; I'm none of your fellows, damme, not I, that can talk without drinking;—here," said the talkative son of Mars, holding out the mug, "take this and fill it full of the righteous!— I can't do without it, by the lord Harry;—I must wet the whistle;—I'm just as dull, if I want drink, as a  Mounseer  without  soup meagre.  — Aye, that's a brave girl!" says he, taking the mug from the young woman, "come, "my lass," putting the vessel to his mouth, here's long life to you if you die to-morrow, as our corporal used to say.—What was I saying when I left off?—Oh! I recollect.—Why, we were ordered to Cork, that we might be in readiness to meet the transports, which were coming round there, from the Channel, to take us, and five more regiments, to North America, to fight the rebels.—We got got into the boats at three in the morning, and fell down the river to the ships that were moored off Kinsale, and a brave set of boys there was, d'ye see, as ever the sun shone upon.—We mustered, I remember, near four thousand, though, I believe, four hundred never lived to return; but no matter for that, we must all die some time or other; and isn't better to die in battle, with a bullet through your head, fighting for your king and country, (as our corporal used to say,) than to sneak into the other world with a 'potecary's shop in your guts? — Damme, I'm no flincher;—here's your good health, daddy," says the soldier, drinking.— I remember," continues this son of gunpowder, "we had a quick passage. We crossed the Atlantic, and arrived at New-York just forty days after the time of our embarkation. — I recollect too that our general would scarcely give us time to refresh ourselves after the voyage, when he ordered us up into the country, where we marched and countermarched after the enemy; but I don't know how it was, but, damme, we always arrived a day too late;—but no matter for that, — here's success to the army," says he, drinking, and afterwards giving me the mug;—"come, you dog," says he,  why don't you drink?—why, your'e down in the mouth;—damme, you'll never grow tall if you don't drink.  In compliance with his solicitations I took another draught; while I was performing of which he kept crying,  Take a good pull;—by G—d it's better for you than mother's milk.—Well, as I was saying, our arms were idle, for want of use, till we were ordered to force the trenches of the rebels at Bunker's-hill. — 
At the mention of Bunker's-hill, I perceived the tears, trickling from the eyes of the venerable old landlord, chace one another
"In big, round, drops, adown his furrow'd face." 
"Why, what's the matter, father?" says the soldier.—Ah!" replies the host, "I lost a son in that engagement, who, had he been living, would have solaced and relieved me in my old days."—"What was his name?" says the soldier.—"John Foster," says the other.—"Jack Foster!" says the knight of the brown musket; — "by G—d I knew him as well as my own brother;—he belonged to our grenadiers, and as clever a fellow he was as ever stood in shoe-leather.—I remember he was shot through the heart as he was leaping into the Yankees trenches.—Why, man, he and I were comrades, and were quartered together at Peg Brown's, who kept a huckster's shop in Boston."—At this part of the story the old man's faculties forsook him, and, overcome by grief, with the assistance of his daughter, after wishing us a good night's rest, he retired to bed.— 

"It was in Boston," continues the soldier, "that I picked up my wife, and a clever b—tch she is as ever pillaged a field of battle.—She was formerly married to a serjeant of our regiment, but, having his head shot off by a cannon-ball, why, damme, the next day she married me;—didn't you Moll?" says he, looking round for his companion, who had stole away to bed with her child in the beginning of the soldier's story;— why, what the devil is she gone to bed already!—never out of her road by G—d!—but, as for that matter, Moll's an old campaigner, and, if ever she wants any thing for asking for, why, she ought to be damned, as our corporal says;—so here's my service to you, my lad, 

says the facetious narrator, drinking again.— 

Well, how should you like to be a soldier?  continues my companion, addressing himself to me.—I frankly replied, "Not at all:" at which he testified a great deal of surprize, and said, "Why, damme, have you no ambition, you dog."—"Why no," I replied, "not to lose my limbs as you have done," the soldier having but one arm.— "Oh! damne, this is a trifle," says he, lifting up the remaining stump; "besides, I should not have lost this but for a mere accident." Upon my inquiring into the nature of it, he informed me that he lost his precious arm at the springing of a mine, where nine-tenths of the party he belonged to were blown to pieces in the air: upon which I told him, without any equivocation, that I had determined never to be a soldier, as I had a particular veneration for peace, health, and a whole skin.—"I am sorry, my lad," says this modern Belisarius, that you have so pitiful a way of thinking;—by the Lord, you've no more idea of glory than a captain in the city militia, nor no more spirit than a tailor.—Now, look at me;— you see me here a poor fellow, wading through the world with one of my wings lopped off;—but no matter for that, that's nothing more than the fortune of war, as our corporal used to say, and is many a brave man's lot as well as mine, d'ye see; but, if so be as how that hadn't been the case, why, damme, by this time, I should have been a greater man than ever.—But I'll say nothing, for boasting is the language of poltroons, and beneath a gentleman-soldier to make use of; so, my little hero, here's t'ye you," putting the mug to his mouth;—"oh! oh! damme," says he, turning the mug bottom upwards, "we are all aground by G—d!"— 
By this time the young woman had returned from attending upon her father; and, intimating to the story-telling soldier that it was high time to think of going to bed, he thought proper to take the hint, and, asking the girl to shew him the hammock where his wife had turned in, he took up his sword and knapsack, and, taking me by the hand, went out of the room, scratching his head, and shaking himself all the way, to solace his yoke-fellow, and give his tongue a respite until morning. 
As soon as the beams of Phoebus penetrated through a little window, and informed the tenants of the cabin that it was time to rise, we all got up, and, having adjusted our travelling baggage, began to march, taking the readiest way to come into the high road that leads to the metropolis, and, the soldier and his wife having the same place of destination, we made a pleasant party of three, and agreed to bear each other company. 
As we walked along, the soldier took frequent opportunities of sounding me upon the strength of my purse, which when he learned was almost exhausted, having only a crooked sixpence and a few halfpence left, his looks became gloomy and thoughtful; and we were laying our heads together, to concert a plan for the procuring a comfortable breakfast, when we espied a carriage coming towards us, followed by three servants on horseback; at the sight of which my companion's countenance began to wear a pleasant aspect, and, bidding me make what haste I could behind a hedge, he told me that he would soon procure some loose cash from the quality in the coach, which was approaching us now very fast. I immediately obeyed his orders, and got with great precipitation on the other side of the ditch, whence I resolved to watch his motions narrowly, not knowing rightly what construction to put upon his words; but I was soon released from my perplexity by observing my fellow-traveller, who had so contrived to twist his left leg and the remaining arm, that he appeared, when limping, (which he did to admiration,) like a poor dislocated wretch, who had not the power of putting his hand to his head, or helping himself in any manner whatever; and, in this woe-begone state, he placed himself in the middle of the road, to be ready, at all points, to encounter the coach, and to lay warm siege to the hearts of the company within. 
As soon as the carriage arrived within a few paces of the soldier, we all perceived with joy that the majority of the company were females, there being three young beauties within, accompanied by an elderly gentleman, whom we guessed to be their father. But my senses were now occupied in observing the artful manoeuvring of the jocund son of Mars; for, limping up to the side of the carriage, to all appearance with infinite labour on his part, and, pulling off his hat, he accosted them in the following pitiable strain:—"Ah! my sweet young ladies, long life to you all;—and, can't you find, in your fair bosoms, one spark of pity for a poor maimed soldier, with a wife and six small children?"—"Yes, my good gentlewomen," cries his faithful help-mate, "this boy, in my arms, is one of them;—we left the other five, in the last town, behind us, as a pledge for nineteen-pence halfpenny." All true, upon my honour," says the soldier; "and, unless you, or some other well-disposed Christians, contribute to our relief, we must perish for hunger."—"How came you by those wounds, friend?" says the gentleman in the coach.—"I lost this precious limb," replies the soldier, exhibiting his stump, in the defence of an officer's wife, who was a passenger on board our transport, whom the Spaniards wanted to make a prisoner of, off Cape Finistere, because, why, my sweet madam," says he to one of the young ladies, who had put her head out of the coach to look at the young child, "she was like yourself, heaven bless you, as beautiful as Wenus."—"Ah! poor man," says the lady, evidently the more interested in his success by the soldier's last well-timed remark upon her person.—"I and nine more of my comrades," continued the military impostor, "were taken prisoners as we boarded the Spanish frigate sword in hand, my good master, when we were put in irons till the ship bore away for Barcelona; then they hauled us ashore, and we lay fifteen months, a fortnight, and three days, on the damp floor of a Spanish prison, with no other covering than an old blanket, full of varmint; and no food but stale onions, black bread, and stinking water, your honour." 
As the female heart is generally susceptible of the soft pangs of sympathy, when listening to the misfortunes of the brave, and the Irish ladies being equal to any upon earth in gentleness, generosity, and compassion, it is no wonder that the young gentlewomen in the carriage should unite to lift the supposed burden of care and want from the shoulders of the gallant veteran;— indeed he had no sooner finished the relation of this well-wove catalogue of woe than they joined in concert to implore the old gentleman to give him a shilling. Upon his expressing an opinion that he thought it too much, they pulled out their purses, as in unison, and, gathering six pence a piece, threw it to the soldier's wife, who picked it from the road, while he exhibited, in silent gesture, as if overpowered with their bounty, some well-conceived attitudes, expressive of pantomimic gratitude, as the coach drove away from this accidental farce, which was performed so much to the honour of the ladies, and, in my opinion, the degradation of the soldier. 

My companion had the grace to watch until the carriage, by descending a hill, got intirely eclipsed from our view, when calling to me to come forth, by the well-known summons of  Fox, come out of your hole!  I leaped into the path, on the side of the highway, while he replaced his knapsack, (which he had taken off for the more convenient performance of the part he meant to play,) and, after buckling it in proper order, we set off on our peregrinations once more, having no object now that could so materially affect our contemplation as the fight of an alehouse, for which we all looked out, with as much ardour as mariners do for land, when their water and provisions are exhausted. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

A proof of my credulity.—My inquiries are followed by a family quarrel.— A familiar dialogue in low life.—Arrive at a public house.—Diamond cut diamond, or the soldier too much for the Israelite.—Arrive at a farm house.— Another proof of the soldier's address in thieving. 

WE were all three pacing along the middle of the high road, to the tune of the  Grenadier's March,  which the soldier was whistling, in quick time, while his eyes glistened with pleasure at the success which had attended his last manoeuvre: and every now and then he cast them towards me with a leer, as much as to say,  Don't you think me a damned clever fellow?  when I interrupted the progress of the tune, by observing, that I was a little surprised how any person could retain so great a share of animal spirits, who had experienced so many, and such reiterated, hardships.—  What, you mean the Spanish prison, and the stinking water?  says my companion. Upon my replying, "Yes," he burst out into a fit of immoderate laughter, which he repeated, looking in my face, two or three times successively. At last, the violent part of his merriment subsiding, he asked me, with a grave countenance, if I believed it.—I told him, to be sure; the circumstances appeared to me so natural that I could think of nothing else upon which he undeceived me, by telling me, very candidly, that the whole, from beginning to end, was neither more or less than a confounded lie.—"What, have you no children in pledge neither?" said I.—"Not one, upon my soul," said he, "nor a brat in the world except this young bastard at my wife's back; and, if any one has a mind to take him into pledge, why, all that I say to the matter is, that I'll be damned if I'd take the trouble to redeem him in a hurry."—"How dare you call my child a bastard, you lob-lolly son of a whore," cries the enraged wife.—"No abuse, Moll," replies the other, holding up the remaining arm in a threatening position, "because why, d'ye see, if you do, I'll bring you to the halberd, by G—d; so, mind me that, if you've a gard for your bones, my girl."— You and your halberd may go to hell together, you lousy, scabberoon, rascal!" says the irritated trull, with her cheeks as red as scarlet with indignation, was it for this I left Jack Furlow, to take up with such a lying, thieving, pimping, must-be-hanged, dog as you?—you know, you scoundrel, that I have it in my power to bring you to the gallows, you leering hound!" 
At this last intimation the soldier thought proper to appease his comrade with all the soothing in his power:— "Come, come, Moll," says he, "why are you in such a damned passion?— you know I was but in jest."—"Take care to crack your jests in proper time, then," replies she;—"how does this youth know who or what I am?"—"Nay, nay, Moll," rejoins the soldier, "there's enough said; if I I have affronted you, why, damme, I'm sorry for it."—"Bastard indeed!" mutters the lady.—"Why, set in case as how I did call Bob a bastard, Moll," replied the knight of the brown musket, "you know the thing's natural enough." 
I now took an opportunity of putting an end to this polite colloquy between the soldier and his trull, by pointing to a public house that awaited our entrance, at a small distance from the place of disputation. Here we found the landlord and a Jew pedlar in a warm contest about the origin of Christianity, and they contended the matter with so much heat, that, although I knew but very little of the subject, I readily concluded they were both in the wrong. The landlord was so engaged in his argument, that he took no sort of notice of our entering the kitchen until my comrade, by touching him upon the shoulder, put him in mind of his duty; upon which he started up, and, begging pardon for his inattention, placed us a long stool by the fire-side, when we took our feats without any farther ceremony.—"What have you to drink, landlord?" says the soldier.— Every thing," replies the other.— Have you any good whiskey? if you have, bring us a naggen apiece," says the dealer in gunpowder.—"I think, without vanity, I may say, that I have the very best whiskey in the country," rejoins Boniface, "I am sure I ought, brother soldier, for I pays ready money for every drop that comes into my house;—no trust for me;—it was always a saying of mine, Never trust but when needs must."—"Oh! damn your palaver, landlord," cries the thirsty soldier, "bring but the sort, d'ye see, and leave us to praise it;" upon which delicate suggestion the host instantly disappeared.— 
"I suppose, gentlemans, you have quite tired the gentlewomans," says the Jew, for she looks monshtrously jaded."— Oh! by G—d, friend," says her helpmate, "it isn't so easy a matter, as you may imagine, to knock Moll up."—"I only shust spoke," says the Jew, "I hope no offensh."—"Oh! not at all," says the other;—"damme, I like you;—give your hand, my honest Israelite;—we must be better acquainted."—"Witch all my heart," says the Jew.—"Will you join in our mess? we're only taking a sup of the righteous this morning to warm our stomachs, man;—here, take a taste," says the soldier, giving the pewter measure to the Jew; which upon putting to his lips, he exclaimed, "I vow to God it ish raw spirits!"—"Raw!" replies the other, "aye, to be sure; damme, I hate to spoil a good thing by mixing it;—but what have you got, Mordecai, in that there box by your side?"—"Oh! a choich collection of knives, shishhors, and rashors;— perhaps your lady would like a pair of shishhors; I can shew her a pair thatsh fit for any lady in the land;— and, besides, heresh a nice pair of ear-rings; they are washed, to be shure, but what shignifies that? they look as well as gold." Both of which articles the soldier's trull accepted from the Jew with looks of great complacency, and would of the whole contents of his box had he offered them for sale.—"For the shishhors I shall charge you, becaush you're a friend, only"— Oh! damn the price," cries the soldier, interrupting him, "we'll talk of that by and by;—here, my honest fellow, take another sup; I desired the landlord to make it weaker for your palate."—"You're vashly kind, sir, upon my verashity," says the other, drinking;—"your good healsh, sir, and yoursh, madam, and yoursh, my fine boy."—"Which road d'ye take?" says the soldier to the pedlar.—"I am going up towarsh town," says the other.—"That's lucky," says the soldier, "then we'll travel together; I have a cousin that lives in a village, about twelve miles distant, which we must pass through;—he's a great brewer, very rich, and has a particular regard for me; and, because I have taken a liking to you, damme, I'll carry you with me to his house, and I'll be bound that he shall purchase three parts of your cargo."— "I am exshtremely obliged to you," says the other.—"Oh! damme, don't talk of that; I'm but a poor soldier myself, 'tis true, but then what signifies that? I have the heart of a general, by G—d, as our corporal says. — Come, then, as we are to travel together, why, 'tis time we thought of marching," cries the consumer of salt petre; at the same time bracing on his knapsack. —"Your liquor comes to two and twenty pence," says the landlord.—"Oh! oh! damme, I forgot that," says the soldier, "but, however, the Jew will discharge it; I've got no change at present, and I'll repay him at the next place we come to:" upon which the itinerant hardwareman, with some manifest signs of repugnance to the business, pulled out the money and paid the amount; which being accomplished, we all set forward in the pursuit of our several occupations. 
As we journied along the soldier entertained the Jew with an account of his rescuing a brother Israelite in America from the hands of some Cataban Indians, who had seized him as he was crossing a swamp, in order to furnish a detachment of light horse with trinkets, and other necessaries, who were quartered within a league of Albany.— "That wash very good, upon my wordsh," says the Jew, "and you will be rewarded hereafter for protecting one of our peoplesh."— Oh!" says the other, "a good action rewards itself; besides, my heart has always warmed to a Jew, d'ye see, ever since one of your tribe, one Moses Manasses, gave some old clothes to relieve a comrade of mine that was sick in Cork," says the soldier, at the same time winking his eye at me.— "Oh! I dare shay as how I knows the man," replies the Jew, "it musht be a relation of little Solomon Manashes, the pomatum-merchant, in Duke's Place."—"Oh! damme, the very same," says the other; "I have heard him mention Solomon's name a hundred times; he was his uncle by the mother's side, and a devilish clever fellow he was, my little Girgashite," replies he, looking at me, and thrusting his tongue in his cheek with a grin.—"Oh! devilish clever," says the Jew, "he was the best maker of Dutch sealing-wax in all Hounsditch." 
By this time we were overtaken by two empty cars, which were returning to the next town, after having carried some straw to a gentleman's seat up the country; and, being all of us a little inclined to be lazy, we procured a seat upon the cars, through the mediation of the lame soldier, for the promise of a quart of ale to the driver on our arrival at the next alehouse. Accordingly we all mounted upon the vehicle, and, having had but an indifferent night's rest, I presently fell asleep, and did not awake till I was pulled by the legs by my companion, who informed me that the cars would go no farther. 
When I alighted from the carriage, I perceived the Jew and the soldier's trull had got a considerable way before us; and, upon my expressing some astonishment, my military companion told me, that they were resolved to push on smartly, to be able to reach the next town before dark, which place had been previously settled by all parties as a general rendezvous. 
As we trudged along, the merry-hearted soldier did not fail to entertain me with stories of sieges and battles, and hair-breadth escapes, interlarded with witticisms, which he delivered in a manner and dialect peculiar to himself.— "Some people," says he, "in my situation, would be damnably down in the mouth, without any money in my pocket, except a couple of crooked sixpences, and not an ounce of provision, of any kind, in my knapsack, for Moll and me to travel upwards of forty miles; but that does not affect me, for, when one expedient fails, d'ye see, why, I try another.— I am resolved to get money when I want it; why, if I can get it honestly, d'ye see me, so much the better, but at any rate I'll get it;—I'm none of your mealy-mouthed rascals that want to be asked twice to what's good.— But stop! what have we here!—some quality on horseback, by all that's lucky!"—and, after bidding me get out of the way, he took a piece of soap from his pocket, and, placing it under his tongue, he watched till they were come pretty near, when he fell flat upon his back, and began to beat the ground with his head and hands, and presently foamed at his mouth prodigiously. 
As the seeming violence of his distress could not fail to attract their notice, they all rode up, while he acted the part of a man sorely afflicted with the epilepsy, or falling-sickness. The company, (which consisted of two ladies on horseback, attended by a young gentleman, about sixteen years of age, and an officer in his uniform, with two servants in livery,) seeing the supposed melancholy condition of my comrade, ordered their servants to assist the poor soldier. As the bait had sufficiently taken, and the company were viewing him with strong marks of commiseration, he thought proper to grow better, and, sitting up, affected to stare about him, as not knowing where he was, which was attributed, by the pitying circle, to the convulsions which he had undergone. 
After being questioned as to his name, regiment, the cause of his disorder, and other corresponding circumstances, he told them, with a look, in which he counterfeited all the wildness of extreme despair, the same account, word for word, that I heard him relate, on the same morning, to the company in the carriage, of the Spanish prison, and its evils, and which, he afterwards assured me, was a circumstantial falsehood: but the man was right in one sense; for he told his tale of misery with such an artless affectation of truth and sincerity, that they threw him, in silver and half-pence, to the tune of seventeen pence. After he had fervently prayed to heaven to bless them for their charity and benevolence, they rode off; and he stooped with alacrity to gather the misapplied offerings of their deluded liberality. 
By the time he had pocketed the donations of the generous and humane travellers, who, doubtless, thought that they were doing an action peculiarly grateful to heaven, I jumped from the ditch, where I had lain hid during the soldier's masterly operation, and joined him company; when, giving me a tremendous slap upon the shoulder, he burst into a loud laugh, and asked me what I thought of the last manoeuvre. Upon my face denoting wonder and amazement, he cried out, with great exultation,  Oh! you dog, if you keep me company, I'll teach you how to live;—it isn't done by working; no, damme, let the foolish part of the world work, and them that are fond of it, say I; for my part of the story, I never was in love with work in my life, and, what's more, by G—d, I don't believe I ever shall. 

By the succession of artifices which my conscientious fellow-traveller had put in practice, to delude the generous and benevolent, since I had the good fortune to associate with him, I could not avoid looking upon him with a kind of horror and antipathy; inasmuch as a knowledge of the infamous means he made use of, to awaken the sentiments of pity in the hearts of the good and worthy, would effectually steel them in future against the supplications of real misery, whenever they might have the pain to encounter it: however, I had resolved to disguise my ideas of his character as much as possible, and, by affecting a compliance with his humours, endeavoured to glean some wholesome experience, without endangering either my manners or my morals. 
As we paced along to overtake our companions, who, by this time, had got the start of us by at least a mile, we came within sight of a farm-house, to which the one-armed veteran proposed going, for the purpose of asking a ruddy-faced damsel, who stood at the door, the hour of the day. Upon his asking the question, she replied, with great civility, that she would go and see. The moment that the girl had turned her back, I observed my colleague looking about the yard with the eyes of Argus. At last, espying a well-fed duck, that came waddling towards us, his chops watered with desire; and, bidding me wait at the door, he stepped on one side, and, with an admirable alertness, struck the duck on the head with a thick oak sapling, which he carried with him by way of walking-stick, and, ere I had well time to contemplate the transaction, he had it deposited in his knapsack; when the young girl returned, and informed us it was almost six o'clock. The soldier, finding that the evening was so far advanced, told me that we must stir our stumps, for that we had a good three miles to go over before we should enjoy the comforts of either  bub  or  grub;  by which polite epithets I had been already taught to distinguish the difference between meat and drink. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

We overtake the Jew.—He is affronted by the landlord.—A battle.—The bloody consequences.—We enjoy the fruits of my companion's dexterity.—Make the Israelite drunk.—He is charged with committing a robbery.—The puhlican enraged, and drawn into a scrape by the mal-practices of the soldier. 

PHOEBUS had just descended to the enjoyment of his beloved Thetis when we arrived at the town of—, and found Isaac (for that was the Jew's name) watching for us at the door of a house, dedicated for the purpose of entertaining the weary sojourner. 

Upon the soldier's making an inquiry after his female messmate, the Jew told him that she was smoking her pipe by the kitchen-fire, whither we all repaired immediately; and, as the demon, hunger, had caused strange commotions in the intestines of us all, it was proposed by the Jew that we should get something to allay it; upon which the publican told our friend Isaac that he could give him as delicious a slice of bacon as ever was broiled on a turf-sire.— A slice of vat!  cries the enraged child of circumcision, who took this proposal of the landlord as a direct insult.—"Why, a slice of bacon," cries the other. — Gives me leave to tell you, sir," replies the descendent of Moses, "that you are a very impertinent short of a fellow."—"Why, I'll tell you what, friend," says the host, "'tis true, I'm obliged to every gentleman for their custom; but what then? why, I won't receive uncivil language from the best man in the county; and, if you repeat such language again, friend, damme, I'll shave your face for you with an oaken razor," alluding to the Jew's beard, which ornamented his lower jaw from ear to ear, as black and bristly as a hog's back.—"Whatch that you shay?" says the Jew, rising from his seat, "you will shave me! may I never enter the synagogue alive, but if you touch a hair of my beard, but I'll"—"What will you do?" cries the landlord, strutting up to him.—"Well done, Isaac," cries the soldier, slapping him on the back, and pushing him forward,  never mind; by G—d, I'll stand by you: 

which assurance of support spirited the Israelite so far, that, going up to the landlord, with his arms enfolded, he repeats,  Now, shir, I shay you are an impertinent fellow, and, moreoverish, I have a great mind —Here the Jew's sentence, like the story in Hudibras, was abruptly broke off in the middle by the incivility of the publican, who, on hearing the word  impertinent  a second time, grappled a three-legged stool that stood in his way, with an intent to knock the Israelite on the head; which Isaac perceiving, dropped instantly upon his knees, and was looking most piteously up to the soldier for relief, when he received such a terrible kick in the mouth from his adversary, as fairly drove him four yards backward into the fire, where he lay, to all appearance, bereft of life, with the blood gushing from his ears, mouth, and nostrils, and his head leaning against an iron pot, which hung over the fire with some potatoes boiling for the family. 
When I perceived the dreadful issue of this adventure, I got hold of one of poor Isaac's arms, and the soldier taking hold of the other, we drew him out of the fire; but, he still remaining motionless, we deposited him upon some straw, and then left him to recover his senses at leisure.—Meanwhile the soldier, pulling the dead duck from his knapsack, gave it to the host to get dressed, which office he set about with wonderous alacrity; when the maimed warrior cast his eye upon Isaac's box, which, taking to the window, he opened without ceremony, and made free with a japanned tobacco-box, and a case of razors. 
We were surrounding the fire, listening to the remarks of the laughter-loving veteran, which were all made at the expence of poor Isaac, when the landlord informed us that supper was ready. We all obeyed the word of command instantaneously, and, entering into a small white-washed room, scarcely high enough for any of us to stand upright, found the duck smoking on the table, encircled with a great quantity of potatoes, and accompanied with two quarts of fine ale, that mantled in the glass like genuine Burgundy. 
As we were proceeding to an instant demolition of the purloined fowl, we heard Isaac calling out vociferously,  Were ish my boxsh? were ish my boxsh?  upon which the soldier went out, and, having washed the Israelite's face with a wet towel, prevailed upon him to come in, and sup upon a fine duck, which, he assured him, upon his honour, his cousin, the brewer, had sent him as a present, when he heard he was in town. 
Upon the strength of this importunity, Isaac consented to make one at the mess, and, having taken his seat at the festive board, every man began to play his part; and, indeed, we did it so dexterously, that, in less than ten minutes, we had intirely cleared the table, not only of the duck, but of, at least, a stone weight of potatoes, which accompanied the delicious morsel by way of a damper. 
I observed, with attention, the cadaverous visage of the Jew, whenever the landlord entered the room, which changed from its natural hue very much, resembling yellow oker, to that of a deadly pale; his lips quivered, and his little black eyes, (shadowed with a monstrous pair of overgrown eye-brows,) which appeared to be more than half buried in his scull, were inflamed with malice and revenge; and indeed his whole frame seemed to undergo an agitation that sufficiently denoted the anguish and perturbation of his mind. Every time that the brawny host left the room, (a circumstance which the Jew attended to with great watchfulness,) he did not fail to utter the severest denunciations of vengeance; and, upon the soldier's telling him that it was a great misfortune that he was not born a Christian, the Jew replied with heat, "And, praysh, my good friend, what bettersh should I have been if Ish had been born a Christian?"—"Why, you would not retain all this animosity against the landlord," says the soldier, "because, if so be, that you're struck on one cheek, it commands you for to turn the other." —"Oh! it dosh, dosh it?" rejoins the other, "why, then, give me leavesh to tell you, Master Soldier, you Christians don't appear to me, by your practish, to be mush the better for your education."—" Aye, how d'ye make that out, Mosy?" says the soldier.— Why, don't they hang the peoplesh from our shinagog in London without merchy," replied the pedlar, "and all, so shall Got shave me, merely because they buy a little plate and jewelsh by way of a bargainsh."—"Aye, aye, you mean, Mosy," says the soldier, "because they buy stolen goods, and so you complain, d'ye see, because they hang the Jews for being consarned in a robbery; — why, if it wasn't for that, how would you, for instance, be able to travel about in safety?"—"Why, thatsh very true, upon my soul;—heresh your healsh, my good friend," says the Jew, drinking to the military disputant, whom he regarded now as a miracle of discernment and integrity;—"by the Got of my fatheresh," added he, "if it was not for the happinesh of your shochiety, I would not stay another hour under the roof of this bloody-minded publicansh." 
In this jocund manner did the Jew and the soldier pass their time, in an agreeable  tête-à-tête,  until one in the morning, by which hour the Israelite's rational faculties were all dormant, or, in other words, he was made completely drunk, having sacrificed to Bacchus so powerfully, that all those ideas which usually swam uppermost in his understanding, such as extortion, deception, malice, and a variety of other passions, of the same amiable complexion, were now totally obliterated from the tablet of his memory, and lay drowned, not in the Lethean lake, so famed by Ovid, yet full as effectually in home-brewed ale. In this beastly state of negative existence did his bosom-friend, the wily destroyer of gunpowder, drag him to bed, with his feet trailing along the ground, as insensible of motion as if he had been a dead body actually drawn from the field of battle. 
After the soldier had properly disposed of the body of this circumcised acquaintance, he returned for his box of pedlary wares, and, taking it with him under his arm, wished us a good night, when we all retired to our several apartments to rest. 
Having drunk a much greater quantity of liquor than usual, I was obliged to rise in the middle of the night, to grope about for a convenience, when I was diverted from my purpose by a terrible outcry of  Thieves! thieves! murder! here's a villain wanting to ravish me!  When my terrors had a little subsided, I perceived the landlord making towards me in his shirt, with a candle in his hand, inquiring where the noise came from; which we quickly ascertained by the same outcries being repeated, and, breaking open the door of the room in which the soldier, his trull, and the Jew, were contained, we saw the former leaning over the bed, in the act of pinioning down the unfortunate Jew, who lay there half awake, muttering Hebrew, which we conceived, by his attitudes and the rolling of his eyes, to be prayers, while the trull was exclaiming,  Ah! you villain; what! want to ruin me, you impudent thief, while my dear husband was here too, you dog; but, by the blessing of the Holy, you eternal vagabond, I'll make you know your Lord G—d from Tom Bell:  at the end of which pious denunciation she laid hold of Isaac's beard, and pulled it with such vigour, that, before the miserable devil could disentangle himself from her gripe, she had torn a handful of the bristly ornament of his chin away by the roots. 
She had no sooner quitted her hold, than her precious helpmate, seizing him by the shirt, in attempting to drag him out of bed, tore it to the bottom; but, failing in that endeavour, he pulled down the bed-clothes, (which Isaac held between his remaining teeth as long as he was able,) and, wielding his stick, began to beat the mahogany carcass of the Jew without an idea of compassion; but Isaac, not relishing that kind of exercise, leaped out of bed with the celerity of a doe, and, before his assailant could well turn round, had secreted himself in the chimney, where he remained, uttering yells and lamentations more dismal than were ever made by Nebuchadnezzar during his residence in the wilderness. 
From the knowledge I had of my companion's artifices, and the extraordinary methods by which he seemed to eke out a subsistence, I had no doubt but that this attempt on the chastity of his lady, which was imputed to the Jew, was no other than a preconcerted scheme between this amiable pair to bring the Israelite into trouble, and take advantage of his consternation; and, in the sequel, I found that my suspicions were but too well founded. 
Upon the reiterated promises of the landlord, that his person should be unmolested, the grief-laden descendent of Mordecai ventured to leave his unsavoury retreat, and made his appearance, covered and defiled with foot, and trembling with the several impulses of feat and cold like an aspen-leaf. 
After inquiring for his clothes, he dressed himself in the best manner he was able, and, at intervals, was talking to himself in a language that we could not comprehend, when the landlord taxed him with the crime that was laid to his charge, and was painting the heniousness of the offence, and that the laws of the land would even justify the soldier in taking away his life in such a situation: when the mortified Isaac fell upon his knees, and protested that he was innocent of the crime of having attempted to debauch any man's wife; and, striking his breast with great emotion, he swore,  Dat ish Cot's truth, so shall Cot save me, so shall Cot damn me. 


The Jew, finding himself environed now with enemies on all sides, determined to get out of the house as fast as possible, and set about it with as much industry as was ever exercised by Ulysses, or any of his companions, to make their escape from the dangerous cave of Polyphemus. After scrambling for his tattered vestments, the next grand object that engrossed his imagination was the box, which contained all his portable merchandise, and by the help of which, under the management of an infinite deal of cunning, did he fondly hope to be one day able to sit down, blest with wealth, (gleaned from the uncircumcised,) among his brethren of the synagogue, who eat and drink, in filth and abomination, agreeable to the law of Moses. 

But, alas! the hours that he had unluckily spent in the company of my exemplary fellow-traveller, the soldier, were doomed by fate to be unpropitious to poor Isaac; and indeed it was predestined that he should suffer so much, that I ardently wish the evils that attended him, on that memorable day, may be considered as sufficiently expiatory for his former mal-practices. 
When, after a search of one hour, he had recovered his box, he opened it with great trepidation and avidity, to see if every thing was safe, when, lo! to his unspeakable mortification, he missed full three-fourths of its contents. He had no sooner made the discovery than the roof echoed with his cries and execrations; —  Oh! by the Cot of my fatheresh, but I am robbed of all my propertish!  cries the miserable Isaac; and, feeling in his pocket at the same time, he found his purse had decamped also; when he added, in heart-rending notes of deep-toned woe,— and my monish! my monish! so help me Cot, Ish lost my monish! 

During the whole of this transaction, the soldier was employed in telling the landlord that he knew Isaac's pranks of old, and that he was sure, instead of being robbed himself, as he was complaining, that he had actually purloined something belonging to the publican, and, in order to escape that and paying his reckoning, he had raised this artificial outcry about a loss which he had never experienced. —  "Fate  and  trot, " says the landlord, "your story is very likely, and I'm much obliged to you for the hint; for, though I never had a Jew lodge with me before, by my soul I always heard they were a set of damned rogues." 
Isaac, still continuing obstinate to the text he first set out upon, and making a terrible outery about his losses, threatened to have the landlord before a justice of the peace in the morning, and, by certain nods, winks, and insinuations, gave us to understand, that he verily believed he had a hand in the business; which so nettled the host, that he instantly collared the terrified Israelite without ceremony, and swore he would search him instantly, for he believed, that, instead of being robbed of the articles he was making such a hideous yell about, he had secreted some of his property; and swore, for the slurs he had thrown upon his character, that, if he found any thing belonging to him concealed about his person, of the value of tenpence, he would hang him like a dog at the next assizes. 
With the assistance of his other guests he threw the Jew upon the floor, and, putting his hand in his coat-pocket, pulled out a tremendous slice of fat pork, in weight, moderately speaking, about five pounds, which the soldier had previously conveyed into his pockets, while he was bustling about his losses. 
Upon this incontestible proof of his guilt, the landlord seized the Jew as his prisoner, and, tying his arms behind him with a strong cord, forced him into the cellar, where he remained a close captive until the morning, when they took him from his dungeon, to carry him before a justice of the peace, with a face as rueful as ever was exhibited. 
The story of the robbery had by this time gained so much ground, that a great number of boys had gathered round the door, waiting, with anxious expectation, for the appearance of the persecuted Israelite; who was no sooner conducted into the street than they set up a roar of exultation, and continued to torment the poor wretch with the bitterest sarcasms upon his religion and the nature of the theft, as the bacon was carried before him, elevated on a pole, amidst the shouts of the surrounding multitude; all which indignities Isaac bore in silence, "with a patient shrug," until they arrived at the magistrate's. 
When they were proceeding to the examination of the culprit, it was discovered that the principal evidence was wanting;—in short, the soldier, having a natural repugnance to the smell of justice, had taken an opportunity, during the bustle occasioned by the progress of so comical a cavalcade, to decamp  a la sourdine;  or, in other words, he moved off without beat of drum, and left the deluded publican to make the best of the circumstance, and to depend for his escape, from the perplexities that then surrounded him, on his own talents and ingenuity. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

My arrival at Dublin.—Astonishment at the magnificence of the buildings. — Accosted by a sea-officer.—Enter into his service.—My master is arrested.— I am charged with a commission, which I execute with dexterity.—My master is enlarged by the good offices of a friend. — New way of manning the navy. 

HAVING conceived a most insuperable aversion to my military companion, in consequence of the viciousness of his disposition, which had been manifested on so many occasions in the short time that I had the honour of his acquaintance, I secretly rejoiced at his retreat, and determined for the future to be more guarded and circumspect in the choice of my associates. 
Being now within a few miles of the capital, I set forward with all possible haste, in order to reach it before the evening, which I should have found a difficulty in effecting, if I had not rode upon a car, that was carrying corn to the Dublin market, for at least six miles of the road. 
When I first entered the city, every thing around me struck me with amazement. Having been used, from my infancy, to see the societies of mankind comprised within the narrow compass of a country town, I had no idea of all that bustle, noise, and confusion, which characterises the metropolis of a commercial kingdom; — the streets, carriages, and public buildings, appeared like so many objects raised by the power of enchantment. 
I had strolled through several streets, totally ignorant of the best method to pursue, and wrapt up in contemplation and wonder, when the wind in my bowels and the gnawing in my stomach put me in mind that it was absolutely necessary I should eat; and this suggestion called forth a hundred others, equally disagreeable; for the reader will recollect, that I had before lost every farthing I was worth in the wide world. 
I remained for some minutes absorbed in reflexion, when, not knowing whither to direct my weary steps in search of either a meal to eat or a lodging to sleep in, I burst into a flood of tears, and was actually standing in the middle of the street a public spectacle of want and wretchedness, when I received a familiar slap upon the shoulder, accompanied with  Damn ye, Jack, what do you snivel for, you dog?  Upon my turning round, I perceived a gentleman, about thirty years of age, with a good-humoured countenance, well dressed, an oak sapling under his arm, and a cockade in his hat. He inquired into the cause of my sorrow with a degree of attention and curiosity, that sufficiently assured me his heart was influenced by the soft dictates of humanity, though his language and his manners savoured somewhat of roughness. 
When he was acquainted with the particulars of my life, he told me that I had been obliged to weather some hard gales, to be sure, considering I was little better than a cock-boat at present, and not much ballast on-board;—"but what of that, my lad," says the generous stranger; "who knows but you may be the better for it as long as you live? — come, give me your hand; — if you have a mind to live with me, d'ye see, as my servant, why, you shall be welcome, and enter into present pay and good quarters: — what d'ye say, you dog?"— is it a match?" 
I thanked him for his friendship, and told him, if he pleased, that I would follow him throughout the wide world; and indeed, at the instant I spoke, my heart accorded perfectly with my professions, as I was much attached to his interest from the open and sincere manner in which he accosted me. 
After following my new master for near a mile, we stopped at a genteel house, in the neighbourhood of College-green, which I soon found was his place of residence, when he informed his landlady that he had hired me as his servant; at the same time ordering me to get my supper and go to bed, as he had no doubt but I was greatly fatigued; and that he should have occasion for me early in the morning. Indeed, there required but little pressing, on his part, to oblige me to execute so agreeable an order, for, what with fasting and exercise, my guts were actually in a state of open rebellion: however, the next morning I entered upon my new state of servitude, and felt the most eager desire for my master's rising, under whose banners I proposed living, for the future, with the utmost degree of ease and tranquillity. 
The servants of the house, with whom I had supped the preceding evening, gave him the most amiable character imaginable, and I learnt from them that the name of my benefactor was O'Driscol, and lieutenant of a man of war, who had obtained leave of his captain, who then lay at Portsmouth, to pay a visit to his relations in Ireland. They farther informed me, that I might expect to be very comfortable in my new situation, as Mr. O'Driscol possessed every virtue under heaven but one, which was oeconomy; to which necessary ingredient in the human composition he was so utter a stranger, that he very frequently supplied the wants of the necessitous and importunate, and left himself without a shilling. 
It was near eleven before I was summoned by the bell to prepare my master's breakfast, which I understood, from the servants of the family, was generally cold beef and grog, which is a beverage peculiarly palatable to seamen, made of rum, water, and sugar. When I entered my master's chamber, he accosted me with,  Well, Tony, you dog, how did you sleep?—was the hammock convenient?—but I suppose as how, that, what with travelling, and the cargo of fresh provisions you stowed in your hold last night, you'd have slept at the main top-mast head of a man of war in the Bay of Biscay:— but, come, have they told you what sort of a breakfast I eat? —When I answered in the affirmative, and informed him that I had laid it for him in the dining-room, he sallied out in his night-gown and slippers, and, sitting down at the table, attacked the beef and bread with the appetite of an alderman. After he had demolished about two pounds of solid beef, and drunk a quart of grog, he ordered me to take away the things, and get my own breakfast. —  I hope you don't want tea,  says my master.—I assured him that I should always think myself extremely happy with a piece of beef and bread for my breakfast. — "Aye, you dog, that's right," says the lieutenant, "I turned off my servant a day or two ago, because he could not do without tea, and be damned to him;—for my part, Tony, I detest tea; I think it a weed that has already done a damned deal of mischief to old England, and I believe, in my heart, can never possibly do any good either to the body politic or natural." 
My master was proceeding in vehement exclamations against the pernicious tendency of tea, when his discourse was interrupted by the arrival of a brother-officer. After the mutual exchange of a few salutations, which appeared much higher tinctured with sincerity than refinement, he dressed; and, giving me a few general orders, these sons of Neptune went forth arm in arm. 
I had now leisure to reflect upon the comforts that I enjoyed in my new employment, which, contrasting with my former situation with Calomel, and the subsequent miseries I had experienced, made me as completely blest in imagination as I believe it possible for a human creature to be. 
At length the hour arrived that it was usual for my master to come home to dinner, when, not seeing him, it was conjectured by the family that he had met with some engagement accidentally, which had prevented him: however, the evening came, and we heard nothing of the lieutenant, which created some alarms upon his account in the breasts of all the people of the house, to whom he had particularly endeared himself by the goodness of his heart and the affability of his manners. 
At last night approached, and yet we heard no tidings of my master. Now every one appeared interested for his welfare. The mistress of the house, knowing the warmth of his disposition, entertained an idea that he might have got into some ugly affray, which had ended in a duel, and he, perhaps,  poor, sweet, gentleman,  (as she phrased it,) had lost his life. 
But our fears, on that score, all subsided about eleven o'clock, when a man with a stern and forbidding aspect knocked at the door, and asked for Lieutenant O'Driscol's servant; at the same time informing the family that my master was arrested for a bond of two hundred pounds, and now lay in confinement at a spunging-house in Thomas-street. 
The horror which I felt, and indeed every person in the house, on hearing the above intelligence, may be more easily conceived than described; however, recollecting the orders of my master, I followed the grim-looking conductor to the officer's house who had arrested him. 
When I came to that dreary abode of misery, I passed through two doors, covered over with plates of iron, the keys of which were kept by a tall, rawboned, man, whose countenance was so terrific, in my idea, that I trembled with apprehension as I passed by him to my master, whom I found in a small, filthy, room, sitting by the fire-side, leaning upon a greasy oak table, with his head reclined upon his hand, and discoursing with an ill-looking fellow, who sat opposite, (whom I afterwards found to be the bailiff himself,) with the most perfect composure and familiarity. 

When I entered the room, the lieutenant ordered me to sit down; and, calling for pen, ink, and paper, he wrote a letter, which having sealed up, he privately informed me of the place where the person lived to whom he had directed it; at the same time assuring the officer, that his friend would satisfy him for the debt the instant he should arrive; to which this human harpy replied,  I am very glad to hear it, master; for why, now, should I wish to keep a good-natured gentleman, as you seem to be, d'ye see, locked up here?—to be sure I get a trifle by the wine, but what signifies all that?—But I perceive, as how, that our bottle's out;— here, you Bet!  cries the bailiff;— upon which the fellow who had conducted me to the house told his employer, that his wife was below stairs, cooking the gentleman's supper. —  Here, then," says the ferocious chief, take this here bottle down to the bitch, and tell her to send another full of claret;—bid her to send the right sort;—d'ye hear, Peter?—you understand me,  says the bailiff; at the same time tipping his understrapper a wink.—"Aye, aye," says the other, and instantly disappeared; when the bailiff, resuming the thread of his conversation, proceeded,— As I was saying, master, suppose I do get a trifle by the wine, it's all nothing, d'ye see me, because why, the taxes eat us up.  — Here his elegant apology was interrupted; for, by this time, my master, having sealed and directed the letter, gave me positive orders to deliver it into none but the gentleman's own hands, and to return to him with all possible haste. 
When I read the superscription, I found it directed to a Captain Pennant, who lived at one of the quays, leading down to the water-side. I literally obeyed my master's injunctions, and, by good luck, got a man to shew me to the captain's house. I knocked at the door, and inquired if such a person lodged there, and if he was at home; upon which I was shewed up stairs, and found the lieutenant's friend, with five or six more gentlemen of the navy, sacrificing warmly to Bacchus, and drowning the sorrows of the day in a capacious bowl of rum-punch. 

When I had delivered my letter, which the captain read with signs of evident emotion, he shewed it to his companions, who, upon perusing it, started from their seats, and proposed an instantaneous visit to my master, but, being opposed in this project by the interposition of their chief, they desisted; the captain at the same time ordering me to go back to the lieutenant immediately, and inform him that he would follow me with a wet sail, and procure his release, in less than an hour. 
As I conceived these to be the tidings of joy, I hurried back to the spunging-house as fast as my legs could carry me, and informed my master of the issue of my errand; upon which he ordered more wine, and treated the bailiff and his people with as much as they could drink, till at last the principal himself fell asleep in his chair, and the rest of his infernal group began to reel under the influence of the purple god. 
I had not returned above half an hour, when we heard a bustle at the outer door, which increased to that violence at last as roused the attention of the bailiff, who had by this time fallen asleep. Presently in rushes Captain Pennant, followed by seven or eight stout seamen, who instantly secured the grim member of the law and two of his people. The third, who stood centinel at the door, foreseeing the nature of the captain's visit, (who was no other than the commander of a press-gang, at that time stationed in Dublin, for the purpose of procuring recruits to man the navy,) flew up stairs, followed by two sailors, who touched the skirt of his coat just as he got out upon the leads of the house; and, in endeavouring to leap over to the top of the opposite mansion, he made a false step, and fell down from an eminence, four story high, into a blind alley, which separated the two houses, and, pitching plump upon his head, fractured his scull, and died upon the spot. 
As for the bailiff and his followers, the sailors, after stripping and tying them together, forced them into a hackney-coach, which happened to be passing by; and, making the coachman get up behind, the sailors mounted on the box and roof, and drove the carriage down to the water-side, where a boat was waiting, into which they forced the unfortunate bailiff and his adherents, and lodged them safe in the hold of a tender, that lay in Dublin bay, at the silent hour of two in the morning; my master, the captain, and myself, going to the house of a friend in his neighbourhood, where it was proposed that he should remain until an opportunity offered of his going on-board the first packet that sailed for England; his remaining any longer in Dublin, after that adventure, being considered by his friends as a measure attended with too much danger. 



CHAPTER XX. 

We go on-board a Liverpool packet.— The effects that the novelty of my situation had upon my mind.—Description of the passengers.—Dispute between a fishmonger's lady and a Methodist preacher.—The great benefit of military men to the ladies in a mixed society.—A dispute that proves the necessity of travellers keeping their religious principles to themselves. — The whole company alarmed with danger.—The admonitions of the field-preacher against swearing.—A miserable catastrophe. 

MY master having received notice that a Liverpool packet would sail in the evening, we instantly set about a preparation for our watery expedition. The lieutenant spent the remaining part of the day in taking leave of his friends, among whom none had a warmer place in his esteem than Captain Pennant. I found, from their discourse, that the intimacy had subsisted ever since they were at school, and that they had both served together in the capacity of midshipmen on-board the Dreadnought man of war; and likewise that the debt, for which my master had been arrested, was not of his own contracting, but what he had brought upon himself in consequence of his benevolence, having given his bond to relieve the family of a friend in the deepest distress, upon the most solemn assurances from the person relieved, that he never should be a sufferer by his good-nature, as he should have the means of taking up the bond long before it became due. 
A sailor having been dispatched from the captain of the packet, to inform us that the vessel would fall down the river on the turn of tide, which would happen in half an hour, we were obliged to manage our affairs accordingly; the lieutenant, to avoid the possibility of being known, having previously dressed himself in a suit of womens apparel, which the captain had got from his landlady for the purpose.—A coach being called to the door, in stepped my master, the captain, and another gentleman, with a large cargo of sea stores, consisting of a cold boiled ham, a pair of fowls, bread, brandy, and claret. 
When we arrived at the place of our destination, at George's quay, and were putting our provisions in the boat, I felt the most unpleasing regret at the idea of leaving my native land, perhaps for ever, and though not quite sixteen years of age, so forcibly did the idea distress me, and so much did the love of my country cling about my heart, that I actually wept with my distress; but, turning my head round to look at the rest of the passengers, and observing that they all appeared in a state of perfect indifference as to that event, I thought the amiable emotions of patriotism were unmanly, and secretly wiped away the tears that bedewed my cheeks, unnoticed by my master or the rest of the company. 
After indulging a silent reverie for a few minutes, my curiosity was thoroughly roused by the novelty of the objects that surrounded me, and the pleasures of my sight had completely dissipated the anxieties of thought. I now, for the first time in my life, found myself sailing on the bosom of the water, surrounded by a number of persons of all ages, conditions, and descriptions. The boat which we were in appeared to me ready to sink with the weight of its burden; and, when I inquired of one of the sailors how far we were to proceed in that manner, and understood that the packet lay at the distance of at least a league from the place of our embarkation, I felt a cold sweat on all my limbs, and, notwithstanding the force of my curiosity, I could not help wishing myself back a hundred times; however, after a safe and agreeable sail, of about half an hour, down the Liffey, with the waters beautifully illumined by the setting sun, the sheds of Clontarf forming a charming back ground at a distance, and the horizon bounded by the purple majesty of the hill of Howth, we arrived at the side of the packet as the sailors on-board were busy in unbending the sails, preparatory to our voyage. 
As the passengers rose from their seats, in order to embark on-board the vessel, I had a fair opportunity of surveying their persons. The number in the boat was nearly fifty, out of which I could easily distinguish about one-third to be cabin-passengers. The rest were mostly Irish haymakers, or, what in that country are called,  spalpeens,  who were going over to England to perform the drudgeries of agriculture, and be ready against the ensuing harvest. 

When the captain had got them all on-board, he made them immediately descend, one by one, into the hold, or bottom of the vessel, where I understood they were to remain until the packet arrived at Liverpool, in company with four horses and a brood-mare, which were slung in the center, as their associates. When they had all descended to their wooden couch, the mate of the packet fastened down the hatch-way, and left them to shift for a bed below as well as they were able. 
The company in the cabin consisted now of seventeen persons, among whom was a celebrated comedian, returning from his theatrical engagements in Dublin; a Methodist preacher, who had been propagating the Gospel in Ireland, agreeable to the doctrine of John Wesley; a Liverpool attorney; a Scotch physician; an officer of horse; a young Connaught noviciate, who was going to study divinity in the Irish college at Paris; a Quaker from Waterford, with his wife; a custom-house officer; a fishwoman from George's-quay; a young gentleman, going out as a cadet in the East-India Company's service; with a pawnbroker's widow and her two daughters; my master habited as a young lady, with a black bonnet and cloak; and myself. 
After a vast deal of altercation about priority, in regard to the beds in the cabin, it was at last settled that the ladies should have the preference, and the men shift for themselves; a determination that seemed perfectly agreeable to all the company except the excise-man, who, grumbling at the decision, observed, that it was but just, as they all paid equally for their accommodation, that they should all fare alike.— He was proceeding in his remark with great bitterness, when the officer, approaching him with a stern brow, told him, that the ladies had done him the honour to put themselves under his protection, and, upon the strength of such authority, he requested them to take possession of those beds which were most agreeable to themselves. 
At this laconic intimation, the excise-man thought proper to drop the subject; and, skulking into a corner by himself, the ladies proceeded to fix upon their place of repose, which was an inner room, detached from the cabin by a glass door, into which they all entered, my master included, and, getting into their several beds, prepared themselves, in the best manner they were able, to encounter that dreadful sickness, which a certain qualmishness in their stomachs informed them was very rapidly approaching.—As for the rest of the tenants of the cabin, they betook themselves to their several quarters with the utmost alacrity; and happy was he who could scud the fastest; for, having weighed anchor, and the vessel being under way, she began to roll in the waves from one side to the other, to the great annoyance of the squamish sons of fresh water, with which the vessel was crouded. 
Night began to spread her sable mantle over one half of this habitable globe, when the captain, coming into the cabin, told his passengers that we had cleared the light-house, at the entrance of the harbour, and were now going right before the wind in the bay, with as fine a gale as heart could wish. 
He had scarce made this declaration, when, in tacking about, the ship gave a terrible plunge, which so alarmed the Methodist, that, putting his head out of his birth, he asked the captain if he was sure we were all safe; if not, he begged him, for the love of God, to tell him, that he might have time to say his prayers, and intercede with the Almighty for the precious souls of the children of sin on-board, who had never known the comforts of the new birth.—"Oh! never mind trifles," replies the tarpawling, "I'll be damned but you're as safe here as in your own bed."—"Oh! don't swear, you monster of impiety," cries the preacher, when such wickedness, and profanation, is on-board, I should not marvel if we all went to the bottom." 
He had scarce uttered the last syllable, when the fish-woman, who slept in the inner apartment, opened the door with her hand, and put out her head, which, notwithstanding the assistance of a dirty woollen night-cap, appeared as unamiable and hideous as the sign of the Saracen's, being covered with carbuncles all over, which made her look at a distance somewhat like a fiery meteor, or blazing countenance, with a pair of small grey eyes, that shone with unusual fury upon this occasion; — when this fish-dealing amazon had opened the door, she accosted the captain of the packet in the following eloquent admonition: —"Here's a pretty rig, blast my limbs, that I am to pay my good-looking guinea for sleeping here, and be disturbed by that canting, lousy, must-be-damned, scoundrel."—"Out upon thee, thou vile daughter of Satan," cries the Methodist. — "Out upon me, indeed!" cries the other, out upon yourself, you dirty, cowardly, snivelling, hypocritical, rascal."— I defy thee, thou ungodly woman," replies the preacher, "and, if you don't turn aside from the path of abominations, you will become as polluted as the whore of Babylon." 
At the mention of the word  whore,  the fishmonger's lady, losing all patience, leaped from her bed with the agility of a greyhound, and, flying across the cabin, would have left the poor Methodist no reason to pride himself upon his admonitions, had not the captain, apprehensive of the consequences, interposed, and assured her, that he was certain the gentleman in black did not mean to offend her. — "How dare he call me  whore  then?" replies the enraged female, "I, to whose character no one dares say, black is the white of my eye." — "I did not mean to call you whore," says the other.—"Who did you call whore then?" says the oister-vender. — "Why, the pope of Rome," cries the Methodist, he is the great scarlet whore of iniquity, that, like a bottomless gulf, swalloweth up the blind and the unwary."—"And how dare such a fellow as you treat his holiness with irreverence?" cries the young noviciate, touched to the quick at the last declaration of the preacher's,  by my conscience, friend, you ought to have that tongue of your's cut out of your head, for making use of expressions so disrespectful to the sublime head of the catholic religion, so you ought. 

This last acrimonious remark operated upon the mind of the Methodist like a spark of fire upon a train of gun-powder, for, in his religious opinions, he was inflexible as adamant, and would indeed have considered himself as a blessed martyr to the faith that he professed, had he died in the act of denying the pope's supremacy. Strengthened with this enthusiasm, he instantly turned about to answer the young champion of his holiness, who lay in a compartment immediately above him, there being three, one over the other, erected on each side of the vessel, to contain beds for the accommodation of the passengers. 
As soon as the preacher had turned himself round, he began to inveigh most bitterly against the encroachments of popery on the liberties of mankind, and was actually proceeding, with all the vehemence he was able, to scandalise the infallible father and his followers, when the excise-man, who slept in the upper tier of beds, being seized with a sudden fit of sickness, and, to avoid bemiring his own nest with the nauseous contents of his stomach, pops his head over the side of the cabin, and instantly discharged, on the most moderate calculation, at least a quart of foetid liquids plump into the face of the angry Methodist, who lay upon his back, with his mouth wide open, railing, with all the fury of a bigot, against the young priest  in petto,  who had offended him, and was collecting all the force of his lungs to give a strong emphasis to the words  scarlet whore,  which he had repeated before with uncommon energy, when the excise-man unluckily disemboguing at that instant, the greatest part of the solid matter falling into the saint's mouth, made the best of its way down his throat, and, fairly choking up all the passages of speech, left the miserable disciple of John Wesley an object of pity and abhorrence. 
It was some minutes before he could make his case known to the cabin-boy, who lay sleeping before the fire, which when he had effected at last with infinite difficulty, the young retainer of Neptune, with great composure, lighted a candle, and, seeing the forlorn state of the itinerant son of regeneration, instantly went upon deck, and, in the twinkling of an eye, brought down a mop and a bucket of salt water. With the former he rubbed off the filth from the face of the unhappy wight, and completed the act of purification by dashing the latter into his face, without either moderation or mercy; but, not performing the last operation with all that adroitness and dexterity which it undoubtedly required, a great part of the briny application running down his bosom into the bed, left him as fairly deluged in salt water as if the ship had sunk to the bottom of the Channel. 

As soon as he had recovered the use of the organs of speech, he set up a dreadful yell, that made the cabin ring, which the major part of the passengers taking for a signal that the packet had met with some accident, and was foundering at sea, leaped from their beds, half dead with fear and horror, and ran after one another upon deck, like so many sheep through a broken fence, to see their danger, and, if possible, swim for their lives. The man at the helm, astonished at the unusual appearance of so many persons upon deck in their shirts, in the middle of the night, took them for apparitions, and was so appalled with fear, that, quitting his rudder, he made the best of his way up the shrouds, and left the vessel to the mercy of the waves, till the captain, who was sleeping in the steerage, hearing of the accident and outcry, ran up, and, finding the helm deserted, was almost frantic with madness, and proceeded to utter a volley of dreadful oaths; which the preacher no sooner heard than he began to admonish him for his wickedness, and, though half dead himself with cold, he could not resist so favourable an opportunity of reclaiming a sinner, and bringing him once more into the paths of peace. For this pious purpose he had mounted upon the hatch-way of the vessel, and began to exhort the ferocious commander to think of the perils of his situation, and not risk the salvation of his precious soul, in such an hour of danger, by expressions that were fraught with sin and unholiness; and, lifting up his hands, with great fervency, he was reminding them of the instability of their situation, and uttering that quotation from holy writ, which runs thus,  Now you see me, and in a little time you shall not see me,  when the vessel gave a violent heave, which not only drove the preacher from his temporary rostrum, but unfortunately pitched him head-foremost into the hold of the packet, where he alighted, with prodigious alacrity, amidst a number of poor creatures from Munster, who lay there huddled together on their passage to England for the purpose of making hay, intermixed with the horses, who were so much offended with the rude and unwelcome visit of the puritan, that one of them, who lay most convenient for the occasion, gave him such a tremendous kick upon his posteriors, as fairly drove him three yards distance against the side of the ship, where he lay, uttering the most piteous yells that were ever heard to issue from the lungs of a human being. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

The storm subsides. — The discomfiture of the itinerant preacher.—Unlucky consequences of my master's disguise.—A convivial party formed in the cabin.— An unfortunate disaster among the passengers.—They continue to practise upon the Methodist.—A mistake occurs which throws new lights upon the subject. 

AS soon as the general consternation had a little subsided, and the company had congratulated each other upon their supposed escape from imminent death, a general inquiry was made as to the fate of the poor apostle, when, lo! he was brought down to his birth in the cabin in such a lamentable state, that it was the general opinion of the passengers that a final stop was put to his arduous labours in future, and that his religious peregrinations, in this world, would be no more; however, he was put to bed, with infinite caution, where he soon fell asleep, and convinced us, by the inelegant tones of his snoring, that he determined to remain among us some time longer. 
The different parties were now courting a little rest, and endeavouring to compose themselves as much as possible, when the demon of discord, determined that our passage should be attended with little else than broils and battles, thought proper, once more, to throw his flaming brands into the bosom of our society; for, just as the different organs of the company were put in tune by the somnific hand of Morpheus, and playing a great variety of cadences in treble, tenor, and bass, a noise issued from the interior cabin, particularly appropriated to the use of the ladies, that discomposed the nasonic band, and instantly broke asunder all the delicate ties of harmony. Though we could not exactly distinguish the immediate cause of the dispute, the words  shocking, indecent,  and  abominable,  were easily to be distinguished, as they seemed to be delivered with great heat and anger. 
Upon the captain's making his appearance, and inquiring into the nature of the disturbance, we found the cause to be exactly thus.—The pawnbroker's widow, who assumed an uncommon share of delicacy, in the whole tenor of her behaviour, since she came on ship-board, was situated, it seems, in the inner apartment, just opposite to my master, who, passing for a woman, in consequence of his apparel, was stationed among them; a place which he more eagerly embraced, thinking, that, in such a disguise, and in so retired a situation, he should run no possible risk of being discovered. However, fate so contrived it that it happened otherwise; for the calls of nature, in some particulars irresistible, forced my poor master to get out of his birth, to perform certain rites, which it is wholly impossible can be done by proxy: and it was in one of these critical situations that the delicate lady above-mentioned happened to espy my master; and she was no sooner convinced of the certainty of his being a man, by perhaps a too curious observation on her part, than she immediately began to reprobate his assurance, as she called it, in terms of the bitterest malignancy; in which she was presently joined by the rest of the females, who declared, one and all, that they would never set foot on-board the packet again. 
At this moment the captain entered, and endeavoured to pacify them as well as he was able; and prevailed upon the lieutenant, after some entreaties, to give up his birth, which in some measure restored tranquillity among us. 
Upon the entrance of my master into our cabin in disguise, it gave rise to a thousand jokes, which were circulated, with great freedom, at the expence of the lady who had caused all this commotion. 

The good humour, that seemed to prevail among three or four of the most convivial of the passengers, induced them to a proposal of immediately getting up, and, by clubbing their sea-stores, to make a party at eating and drinking, in order to amuse the time until a prosperous gale should drive them to the British shore.—The lieutenant sang, the comedian repeated a variety of speeches from our most celebrated plays, to the manifest diversion of the company; the physician favoured us with a discourse on the  materia medica;  and the attorney informed us of a great cause he had obtained in Ireland for the widow of a marine officer, whose husband was shot in the act of fighting for his country, on-board a king's ship, in the Mediterranean; at the same time assuring us, that the only motive he had for prosecuting the matter was a desire to have justice done to the distressed; which last insinuation roused the attention of the custom-house officer, who swore, if that really was the case, the attorney must have altered his practice most cursedly, for that, to his certain knowledge, there was not a practitioner in the kingdom who had a keener eye to the profits of his profession. 
This sarcastic remark of the excise-man seemed to call forth all the natural choler of the attorney, who retorted the charge with interest, and told him, he supposed, because he had been continually robbing the king, his master, of his dues, and plundering his subjects, he imagined every other profession was equally infamous and dishonourable.— There was a spirit of rancour and truth in this last observation, which worked upon the feelings of the excise-man so far as to induce him to lift up a stool, that stood near him, to chastise the aggressor, which, had the meditated blow taken place, would, in all human probability, have deprived the law of one of its noble members; but he, quickly perceiving the hostile intentions of the assailant, crept under the table, to avoid the impending storm, with the agility of a monkey, and remained there till the fury of the excise-man was appeased by the attorney's apology, which he made, without hesitation, in terms of the most abject humiliation. 
Just at this instant the cabin-boy came down among us, and exclaimed, with great exultation, "land! land!" upon which the fish-woman, thrusting her head out of her birth, roared out,  Oh! for God's sake, don't talk to me of land, but bring me the pot!  upon which the boy, whose duty it was to administer that necessary utensil, whenever the patients could not do it for themselves, made haste to accommodate the fish-selling nymph, who, not thinking he had hurried himself so fast in her service as he ought, was attempting to scold him in her own language, and had actually got out the first syllable of the laconic word  scoundrel,  when her sickness overpowered her eloquence, and she fairly deluged the young master of the ceremonies with the foul contents of her overloaded stomach. 
When the poor boy, who had fallen down under the weight of the salute, got up to shake himself, he looked like one of the naiads of Fleet-ditch, and, in all probability, would have been stifled with the unsavoury scent, had not one of the sailors, with infinite dexterity, seized up a pail of water, which stood in the cabin, and washed off the filthy ornaments from the young gentleman's head, who was restored once more to a state of purification. 
By this time the Methodist, whose situation had become extremely irksome to him, got up and joined the company, who had met round the table, in hopes, by listening to the spirit of their lively conversation, to forget his own disgrace. His intention was no sooner manifested, than these sons of pleasantry made way for his accommodation, and insisted, in spite of his intreaties to the contrary, that he should sit at the head of the table, and give the company a sermon for the good of their souls. This invitation, which the preacher received in a literal sense, was highly grateful to his disposition, and pleasing to him in a spiritual light; for he had long broiled in secret at the impiety of their discourse, and would most willingly have corrected their manners; but the recollection of the recent misfortunes he had experienced, from his former endeavours to bring the captain of the packet into the road of salvation, was still uppermost in his imagination, and he thought it the more prudent step to conceal his disapprobation than venture the loss of his life a second time. 
They had scarcely fixed the wandering saint in his new situation, when his health, and success to his mission, was proposed by all the company, except himself, to be drunk in a full bumper; to partake of which token of good fellowship he at last consented, with evident marks of repugnance. 
During the time that was spent in persuading the preacher to take off his glass, the attorney, who sat at his right hand, contrived to substitute a large glass of brandy, instead of that which had been appropriated to his share, which the poor itinerant swallowed completely before he found out his mistake; but he had no sooner lodged it in the recesses of his stomach than he made many wry faces, and complained bitterly of the imposition. But the noise of his remonstrances was soon drowned by his associates, who, having by this time sacrificed to Bacchus with the zeal of true votaries, had become half-seas-over; and, so far were they from being disposed to listen to his complaints, that they absolutely compelled him to drink glass for glass, with this difference, that, while they were quaffing weak punch, the Methodist's glass was continually strengthened by a large infusion of strong spirits, which the conscientious attorney kept by him for that excellent purpose, till the blinking of the preacher's eyes sufficiently informed the joyous circle that they had overset his understanding, or, in other words, had fairly done his business; nay, so much had the liquor thrown the good man off his guard, that he actually proposed to sing a song, which being greedily acceded to by the company, he gave them a ditty, which he learned in the days of sin, ere the potent workings of the Spirit had effected his regeneration, and the efforts of grace had intirely subdued the old man within him. 
When he had finished his song, he received the applause and thanks of the surrounding group, who now determined to crown him like a Bacchanal, and, stripping off his wig, they contrived to make a sort of wreath for his head; but the poor preacher, not used to receive such high tokens of honour, sunk under the weight of them in his chair, and, falling fast asleep, lay with his mouth wide open, snoring most tremendously. He had not enjoyed his slumber above a quarter of an hour, when the company were informed the vessel was in sight of Liverpool; and, upon a sailor's roaring out that he saw the  new lights,  the sound instantly vibrated in the ears of the drunken Methodist, who started from his sleep with the phrensy of a madman, and, reeling about the cabin, asked, with great vociferation, who had any thing to say against the  new lights;  if they had, he declared himself ready to defend them against all the arguments that could be brought to their prejudice by any child of Satan whatever, from Martin Luther down to Father O'Leary. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

The packet arrives at Liverpool.—Take a place in the stage for London.—Description of our fellow-travellers.—An accident that happened on the road.— We stop at Coventry and quit the stage. — Meet a sailor on his journey from Plymouth. 

WHEN we arrived in the harbour of Liverpool, my master made what haste he could on-shore, giving me orders to follow him to the inn with his baggage. It was late in the evening when we disembarked, and I was preparing to make the most haste I could to obey the lieutenant's instructions, and thank my stars that had once more brought me on  terra firma,  when a rude fellow saluted me with great incivility, and demanded to know where I was going with my trunk. I instantly told him, if he had a mind to know he must follow me; upon which he informed me that such behaviour might do in Dublin, but that he would teach me better manners; and, immediately seizing my master's trunk, forced it from me; at the same time honouring me with the familiar appellation of bog-trotting idle scoundrel. This last piece of rudeness roused me to a state of desperation, and I was preparing to chastise his insolence, when a countryman of mine, who had overheard the whole business, informed me that it was my best way to make it up in the best manner I could, for that my opponent was an officer of the port, in the execution of his duty. I answered, if he was performing his duty, he should at least do it without insulting his betters. "Betters!" cried the enraged officer,  and whose betters do you call yourself, you Irish son of a whore;  at the same time assuring the company that I was a notorious smuggler, who wanted to run some prohibited goods, and offered a bet of a guinea, to any of the standers-by, that my trunk was full of contraband commodities. It was in vain that I assured him to the contrary; and, as I began to find that I had acted wrong in the first instance, I wanted to repair it by every submission in my power. But I mistook the road to the officer's favour, for the more I humbled myself, the more insolent and insufferable was his behaviour; and I certainly should have stood for an hour longer, arguing with him upon the honesty of my intentions, had not my countrymen whispered me in the ear to give him a shilling. I instantly took the hint; and the moment he felt the splendid coin touch his palm, his muscles relaxed into a good-humoured smile, and he told me, with a loud laugh, that I and my box now might go to hell together;— that he had at first taken me for a smuggler, but upon a closer acquaintance with me, why he had found his mistake; and, taking me by the hand, told me, he believed I was a damned honest fellow, and, that if he knew the house I was going to, he would come and drink a pot of beer to our better acquaintance. I accepted his offer, told him the sign of the inn, and, taking my trunk upon my shoulder, set forward to meet my master, who, I found, had been waiting for me with great impatience, having taken a place in the stage for himself, which was to set out for London in a few hours, and intended that I should ride on the outside. 
The first thing that occupied the lieutenant's attention was to shake off his temporary metamorphosis, and once more to appear in his real character, which he effected with great expedition; and I had the trunk adjusted and packed just time enough for the coach, which had drove round to the front door to receive its new tenants. 
When we came to the machine, we found a violent contest for precedency had taken place between an elderly gentlewoman, about fifty, who measured at least three yards round the waist, and a diminutive woman, who, from the severity of her aspect, bore strong credentials of being a neglected virgin: however, after a number of tossings of the head, flirts with the fan, and a prodigious interchange of ma'ams and misses, it was determined, by the master of the coach, that the overgrown gentlewoman should have the preference, upon the strength of her name being entered first on the books. 
After them followed my master and the captain of a West-Indiaman, who had just arrived at Liverpool with his cargo, and was going up to London to the ship's owners. 
While the inside passengers were regulating themselves, I mounted the roof of the coach, where I was soon joined by a jocose sailor, an Irish weaver, a young woman, who was going to town to her friends, and an old man, who was muffled up close in a frieze great coat. 
In this manner we set forward; and, as I felt my situation very precarious, I took especial care to grasp fast hold of an iron which is nailed to the top of the machine, for the advantage of those persons, who prefer the benefit of the prospect to the ease of riding within. 
We had not proceeded above nine miles, when an accident happened that discomposed the oeconomy of the whole stage system; for our coachman, who wanted to shew his dexterity, in turning the narrow corner of a village, missed his aim most confoundedly; and, whether it was owing to his want of address in the business, or the ungovernable spirit of the horses, I will not take upon me to determine; but certain it is, that he completely overset the machine, in the very worst part of the road that it could possibly have happened. 
The violence of the shock luckily pitched me farther than my messmates, for I alighted upon a dunghil, without receiving any considerable injury, except a slight bruise. But fortune was not quite so complaisant to my companions, who were plunged deep into a stinking slough, that a neighbouring farmer had kept, time immemorial, for the purpose of mixing the manure for his land. The sailor and the weaver made shift to disengage themselves from the unsavoury lake; but it was far otherwise with the poor young woman, who had been thrown into the thickest part of the composition, where she lay in a miserable condition, like an amphibious monster, one half of her body being buried in the mud, from her head to her hips, and the rest kicking in the vacant air, tacitly asking the assistance of all well-disposed Christians to rescue her from a situation, in which if she remained but a few minutes longer, all human aid would, alas! have been ineffectual. 
As for the old man, who had shared the same unhappy destiny, he made shift to crawl out more like a rat three parts drowned than a human creature, not having the smallest vestige left to ascertain the nature of the animal tribe he belonged to, except that he walked erect, and made use of two legs instead of four. 
Nor was the consternation within the coach a whit less productive of disasters; for the company there had been thrown by the accident all in a heap, where they lay, intermingled in a rancorous state of enmity and discordance, hissing and annoying each other, like so many vipers at the bottom of a glass in a chymist's shop window. 
The noise of this sudden catastrophe having reached the people of the village, they poured forth in numbers to the assistance of the unfortunate travellers: and the first step they took was to open the coach-window that lay uppermost, from which aperture they endeavoured to drag out the fat gentlewoman before-mentioned by the legs; but the poor fellow, who was most forward in the service, had good reason to repent his zeal in her favour; for she, not knowing the intention of the visit, no sooner felt a man attempt to get hold of those delicate members, than she gave him a most villainous kick in the eye, which stunned the poor devil so much that he fell senseless to his mother-earth: but, the party being instantly reinforced, they renewed the attack, and brought out the fusty amazon by main force, but not before she had secured the cap and head-dress of the lady who remained within, with whom, it seems, she had been maintaining a bloody quarrel, but had totally overcome her by dint of personal prowess, and brought out these emblems of triumph in her hand, which she brandished about, to the infinite diversion of the spectators. 
After an hour's industry, on the part of the coachman, the affairs were tolerably adjusted, and the company were once more preparing to enter the vehicle, except Miss Tippet, for that I understood to be the lady's name, who had been so mauled and defeated within-side the machine:—she had determined to return to Liverpool, where she kept a millener's shop, and to bring an action of assault and battery against her opponent, whom we now found to be a tallow-chandler's widow, who was her next door neighbour. 
After this denunciation of vengeance from the enraged maker of caps, we set forward once more, and, by the time we arrived at Coventry, from the scene of our disgrace, (in the interval of which nothing material happened,) my master was either so sickened with his companions, or fatigued with that mode of conveyance, that he signified his intention to the coachman of proceeding no farther; and, after bidding adieu to his fellow-sufferers, and giving the coach-man a shilling, to reward him for not quite breaking our necks, we took up our quarters at the principal inn in the city; at the entrance of which my master perceived an old seaman sitting at the door, taking out some tobacco from a leathern pouch. As the features of the man were familiar to the lieutenant, he asked him where he came from last; to which the sailor replied, from Plymouth, and that he was almost foundered on the journey. As the voice of distress never touched his ear unnoticed, this was the best possible expedient the old tar could have made use of to have his wants supplied; for he instantly ordered the weary tarpawling to follow him into the parlour, where he made him sit down, and partake of those refreshments which he had ordered for his own particular accommodation. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

The sailor gives a history of his adventures.—The vicissitudes of a sea-faring life.—An occurrence that proves many accidents happen between the cup and the lip.—The spirit of true philosophy to be found in all stations.—My master stops in Coventry.—I obtain leave to see a play. 

WHEN the spirits and strength of the seaman were recruited by the good cheer he had enjoyed from the lieutenant's bounty, he gave the following account of himself, at his particular instigation. 

Why, master," says the grey-headed tar, "as for the matter of that, my life is no great things;—I have experienced, to be sure, I suppose, like most part of the world, sometimes joy, and sometimes otherwise;—I have been beaten about in many a hard gale of distress, and, when I thought my hulk was near foundering, why, a lucky breeze has sprung up, and drove me into the port of happiness:—as for instance; now, this morning, I was cold, hungry, and tired, and I didn't know where to get a bit of bread in the varsal world; (that is, d'ye mind me, between this and the Pay-Office, for there I hope to get shiners enough;) and I knew it was no matter to be telling the people of these parts that I was a seaman in distress, for they look upon a worn-out old sailor as little better than a brute beast;—but we can't expect otherwise for the matter of that; for how should they know what belongs either to good manners or humanity, when they never were at sea? — but we can't make a silk purse of a sow's ear, as the saying is, so we must take the world as it runs, sometimes rough, sometimes smooth, ebb and flood, hey, master. 
But, to come to the point, I have been to sea, man and boy, for the last forty years of my life.—I can't say that I entered into the service, because why, I was pressed on-board a tender, as I was going down one morning to carry some victuals to my poor mother, who then lay ill, and lodged in an alley, near Wapping, but she is dead now, and God rest her soul, I say. 
Well, as I was saying, they stowed me in the hold of a tender, whence I was put on-board a frigate that lay at the mouth of the river, and was under sailing orders to cruise against the Spaniards, for we were then at war, you must know, with the  Mounseers. 

Though I was a little down-hearted at first, my spirits soon began to revive; for my comrades told me that they expected to take some rich prizes, and, if that was the case, why, I should make my fortune. This was joyful news to me; and, so far from being backward in the business, my heart beat with impatience till an opportunity should offer of our coming to close quarters with the enemy:— and we were not long disappointed; for, the men at the mast-head seeing a sail, we immediately cleared decks, and bore down upon the vessel. After a run of two hours, we discovered her to be a ship of almost double our force, and would have tacked about, but, as it was impossible to escape her then, why, we resolved to give her as warm a reception as we were able, and, damme, to it we went ding dong, and, after a battle of two hours, we obliged the enemy to sheer off. We should have boarded her, indeed; but, half our crew being killed, and the other half desperately wounded, we could not muster hands enough to man the long-boat, so we were forced to relinquish our prize in the moment of victory; which was a damned hard case, master, considering as how she was a Spanish galloon, deep laden with the riches of Peru.—Our rigging and ship were so tattered with the heavy cannon of the enemy, that we were obliged to make the first convenient harbour to refit, which we luckily did in a day or two. 
I forgot to tell you that I received a shot, as I was standing at one of the guns, which went clean through my shoulder, and so I was ordered among the wounded to the hospital, where, after remaining three months, I was pretty well recovered; and, as soon as I had sufficient strength to do my duty, was turned over to a third-rate, which was to compose part of a fleet of observation. 

I remained on-board six months, when we returned to Gosport; and, as our ship was ordered to the East-Indies, I was advised to give a will and power to some friend in the town to receive my wages and prize-money, in case I should be killed in an engagement, or die at sea. I accordingly followed their advice, and left it with my landlord, Tom Handspike, who kept a gin-shop on Portsmouth-Common. 
When our ship was properly victualled we set sail; and, after being beat about for upwards of two years, we once more paid a visit to Old England, where I resolved to settle, on my arrival, for life, and with part of my wages to set myself up in trade. But here I reckoned without my host; for my landlord turned out to be a damned big villain;—he had gone to the Pay-Office, hearing that our vessel was daily expected, and, taking a forged letter, to prove that I was killed on the coast of Brazil, received every penny of my money. 
I was cursedly dispirited at this accident, not knowing where to get sufficient to buy me a dinner, when I met with an old ship-mate, who, reading the situation of my affairs in the lines of my face, lent me a guinea, with which I went and regaled myself, and, at the same time, inquired after an old sweetheart of mine, who lived in that neighbourhood. I soon found her out, and renewed our former courtship, and we were to have been married shortly after; but, going one morning to buy the wedding-ring, I was hailed by a press-gang, who hurried me away, a second time, in spite of my protection, which I had procured for my security at Portsmouth. As for complaining, I soon found that all was needless; so I bent my disposition to my fate as well as I could, and we sailed for the West-Indies, where I experienced more hurricanes in half a year than I had before in my long voyage to the Indies. 
A flux and fever breaking out, among the crew, carried off great numbers; and the climate was found at last so destructive, and our ship's company so much reduced, that we were ordered home by the admiral, and arrived in a dismal state at Spithead, where the fever seized me in a most violent manner. I lay for six weeks in such a condition that nobody expected me to live; but, by God's help, I recovered at last, and had the mortification to find that the expences of my illness had reduced me to my last guinea; and I was the more chagrined as I wanted to buy some clothes, to appear as decent as I could, as I intended to make the best of my way to London to marry little Sall, and then to settle for life: howsomever, I made a shift, with the little money I had, and the credit I had procured at a slop-shop, to cut a tolerable figure. 
When I was completely rigged I set out for Wapping, but, having no shiners left, I was obliged to walk the greatest part of the way, and arrived there in the evening; but, burn my old shoes, if the neighbours didn't tell me that little Sall had married a journeyman-tailor the week before. I own I was grieved to the soul at finding her false-hearted; but, nevertheless, I plucked up a good heart, (damme, we should always have a good heart, you know, master, let things go as they may,) and resolved never to think of matrimony again:—no more I have, master; for, from that hour to this I have been tossed about upon the wide seas, which, boisterous as they are, I sometimes think more constant than a woman's mind. 


As I now thought of nothing else than passing a sailor's life, why, I have roamed about the world in all quarters, sometimes on-board a merchantman, and sometimes fighting for my country; and what man, master, would not like to fight for his country, if so be as how he could get any thanks for it when he's done?—Here am I just relieved from a French prison, where I was kept on a damned short allowance for nine long months, till I was exchanged and brought to Plymouth, from which place I have now been travelling, in hopes of getting my wages in London.—To be sure I have encountered some cursed hard rubs in the way; but what of that? every thing must have an end, you know, master; it will be all the same a hundred years hence; 'tis a long lane that has no turning.—Why, Lord help your honour, I knew you were a seaman when I first clapt my two looking eyes upon you.—There's a certain generosity in the face of an honest tar which isn't to be found in the rest of mankind;—damme, they are all so envious of each other, that their passions destroy their feelings, and they've no more notion of assisting a fellow-creature than an attorney, egad, has of going to heaven. —Here the seaman having finished the account of his life, my master gave him a guinea, to drink the king's health, which the other accepted with warm tokens of gratitude, and took his leave. 
The lieutenant expressing a strong curiosity to see the town, the master of the inn offered to accompany him, which proposal he readily embraced; and out they sallied for that purpose, having first given me permission to make what use of my time I thought proper till his return. 
As I was sauntering along the street, I saw a croud gathered about a man with a drum, who was holding forth to the multitude which surrounded him, with their mouths wide open. As curiosity was ever one of my strongest passions, I made what haste I could to learn the propensity of his eloquence. When I came to the spot, he immediately sent a child to me with a play-bill, which announced the performance of the evening to be Hamlet, Prince of Denmark. As I had always a natural love for poetry of every denomination, I determined not to let slip so favourable an opportunity of indulging that inclination, especially as I had previously obtained my master's leave to make use of my time in any way most agreeable to myself. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

I go to a tragedy.—A great nose more honoured in a strolling company than great abilities.—Evil consequence of illiterate critics.—The ghost proves his materiality.—A family quarrel.—The melancholy issue of public disputes. 

ACCORDINGLY I suffered myself to be carried away by the invitation of the dramatic herald, and, inquiring for the gallery, entered the theatre, along with many others, brimful of eager expectation, to see the performance. The theatre was constructed with great ingenuity out of an old stable, and the only distinction made between the different places of boxes, pit, and galleries, was by means of a board nailed across. 
As the audience, which was composed of a motley assemblage of different characters and ages, became riotous, an old man, with one eye, came into the orchestra, which was made out of a large box, with the lid taken off. After he had bowed respectfully to the company, he pulled from under his coat the instrument of harmony, and played, with excellent discretion, the well-known and celebrated tune of  Buttered Peas;  but, the audience growing particularly clamorous for  Roast Beef,  this half-sighted musician complied with their request.—From his appearance and execution he called strongly to my mind the old gentleman, whom I have formerly mentioned as the Orpheus that moved the bear to dance a  fandango,  when I had the honour of being first introduced behind the scenes of a travelling company in Ireland. 
But the bell ringing from within indicated to the company that the play was going to begin; and, agreeably to the summons, the curtain was drawn, and discovered Francisco and Bernardo in close conversation. It was soon noticed, by the noisy part of the audience, that Bernardo's nose was of an uncommon size; and indeed it resembled more a protuberance of mulberries, which hung in rich clusters, than a human feature. I soon found that this gentleman was the most conspicuous personage of the drama; for he received more distinction, on account of that amazing ornament, than all the rest of the actors put together. 
When the ghost made his appearance, it had a visible effect on the majority of my neighbours in the gallery, some of whom were almost petrified with awe at the dreadful solemnity of the object; but, as our admiration is built upon comparison of one thing with another, so did the ghastly appearance of the royal Dane operate to make the succeeding scene more captivating;—the reader will easily conceive that I can mean no other than the brilliant court of Denmark, which burst upon our sight with as much grandeur as the wardrobe could furnish, assisted by all the credit that the company could procure in the town for tinsel, tie-wigs, clean linen, and potlids. 

As soon as young Hamlet came forward, all eyes were centered upon him, for he had long been considered as the Roscius of Warwickshire. I observed he made three solemn strides, then enfolded his arms and stood still; for which uncommon excellence he received the loud applause of the audience.—I was going to inquire of a person, who sat next me, into the reason of their applauding him so much above the rest, when my notice was riveted upon a comical fellow, who sat near me, roaring out, "Here comes Nosey!" which appellation I soon found to belong to my friend Polonius, who was the identical being that had five minutes before personated Bernardo with so much honour. 
The unexpected salute of my friend in the gallery so discomposed the muscles of the whole court of Copenhagen, that, in spite of their best efforts to appear grave, a simper became universal, and it was some time before her Danish majesty could recover herself sufficiently to reprove the young prince for his unseemly melancholy: however, every thing went on very smoothly until Hamlet began his first soliloquy; but he had scarce uttered his wish, that
"His too, too, solid flesh would melt!" 
than a countryman, who sat in the pit, bawled out,  Noa, noa, friend, you needn't wish any more of thy flesh to melt; why, mon, you're as thin as a whipping-post already:  and, indeed, though the observation was rather  mal-à-propos  in point of time, it was strictly justifiable on the score of truth; for the poor fellow, who played the character, had not flesh enough, upon his whole carcass, to give a cat a breakfast. However, this interruption was warmly resented by the friends of the performer, and a battle would have taken place in the pit, had it not been for the interposition of the manager, who had condescended to perform the King himself: he came round from the stage among the combatants; and, whether it was by the persuasion of his tongue, or the influence of his dignity, I will not determine; but he certainly restored peace to the theatre, and the players were ordered to proceed. 
Every thing now went on in the proper  routine  of business, except in the scene between Laertes and Ophelia, when it was very palpable that the young lady had been imprudent enough to drink too much that afternoon; indeed she had hurt her memory so much by the sacrifices she had been making to Bacchus, that she scarcely remembered a single word of her part, and, in one particular passage, when the prompter neglected to assist the fallibility of her memory, she forgot her dignity so far as to damn him for a lazy son of a b—h; however, the indecorum was committed by a lady, and, consequently, permitted to pass without censure. 
But shortly she was relieved from that temporary embarrassment by the entrance of old Polonius, the purple majesty of whose nose was a never-failing source of mirth whenever he came forward. Three times did he attempt to give the celebrated instructions to his son Laertes, and was as often obliged to desist, from the roars of laughter that issued whenever he opened his mouth. At last they were fairly obliged to conclude the scene without it, and poor Laertes was dismissed to France without the benefit of those solid apophthegms of wisdom and experience. 
At the commencement of the second act, attention seemed to have resumed her throne, and every thing jogged on tolerably quiet till the closet-scene between Hamlet and his mother, when the Ghost made his  entré  with prodigious majesty. I should have before observed, that the wardrobe of this company being rather scanty, it was absolutely necessary to make a coat of mail for the spirit in question, there being no suit in their cabinet of wearables. To effect this in a hurry, they were obliged to sew a few pieces of pasteboard together, which, when covered with old play-bills, made a very tolerable  succedaneum  for the want of something more resembling the supposed habit of the departed Dane; and, indeed, considering everything, the poor Ghost acquitted himself tolerably well until the moment he was preparing to take his leave, when, unluckily, in facing about to the queen, to enforce the directions to the young prince to persevere in his conduct toward his mother, he was under the necessity of standing with his breech to the audience. Now the point of good manners which might have been invaded by this manoeuvre would have been overlooked with great good-humour, but the infringement on decency, that it occasioned, could not; for it must be observed, that the ghastly shade wore a black pair of breeches, under his coat of mail, which were rendered something the worse by the depredations of time; indeed so much so, that, between the legs, there was a rent of most capacious magnitude, out of which a remnant of the spirit's shirt hung in a most ungraceful manner. 
This breach in the galligaskins of the Ghost was no sooner perceived by the motley audience than an universal uproar ensued, accompanied by incessant roars of laughter.—The poor fellow felt himself embarrassed; and, finding that his person was the center of the joke, turned himself to the right and to the left, but without the desired effect. At last, mustering up an unusual degree of courage, he stepped forward, and attempted to address the audience, but was most violently repelled with groans and hisses. At length, finding all his endeavours ineffectual to learn the state of their wishes, he was preparing to walk off; but had not got above a yard from the side-scene, when an unlucky spark, who occupied one of the side-boxes, set a large pointer, which he had with him, at the miserable remains of departed majesty, whom he caught hold of, just as he was slipping off the stage, by the shirt, which hung out behind, and which he shook, to the unspeakable diversion of the company, fairly dragging the unfortunate spirit to the center of the stage before he quitted his hold. Irritated to a degree of madness at this insult to his dignity, which was more than flesh and blood could endure, and eager for revenge, he tore off his paper armour in a twinkling, (which, indeed, was tantamount to his stripping in buff, for, the little shirt that he had left, and which composed the whole stock of linen that belonged to this calamitous son of Thespis, had been completely torn away by the fangs of the animal that had annoyed him,) and, coming to the point of the stage, offered to box the best man in the company for a gallon of beer: but the Ghost's challenge not being readily accepted, he misinterpreted their forbearance into a spirit of cowardice in the audience, and began to abuse them in terms which sufficiently proved, that his godfathers and godmothers had completely taught him the vulgar tongue, in the most extensive sense of the phrase. 
Before he had proceeded far in his passionate address to the spectators, he was stopped by a domestic enemy, who, by her great zeal in endeavouring to regulate his behaviour, put a period to the dramatic entertainments of the evening. This heroine was no other than the unfortunate Ghost's wife, who personated her majesty of Denmark for that night; and, hearing of the misbehaviour of her spouse, hurried to the scene of action, with a full determination to punish her yoke-fellow for this breach of decency, which, she wisely apprehended, would be the ruin of her benefit, which was to have taken place the next evening. The furious lady, totally regardless of the dignity of the character she had assumed in the play, rushes on her ill-fated husband, and, by a well-directed blow, which, unhappily alighting on his eye, levelled the vaunting spirit with the stage. But, though it was evident that the salutation had disconcerted, it by no means subdued, him; for, springing immediately from the boards with great facility, he returned the compliment with such address as made the blood-royal of Denmark flow most copiously through the apertures of her majesty's nose. Now the audience, beginning to interfere warmly in the dispute, leaped upon the stage, and, dividing into different factions, each supported the object they thought most aggrieved; but, the majority turning eventually in favour of the lady, she gave her miserable husband such a drubbing as almost deprived him of existence, for he lay extended upon the scene of action sightless and forlorn, like one who was shortly to pay a long visit to the Stygian shore. 

But it was ordered, by the inflexible destinies, that the perils of that evening should not end here; for, while the Amazonian queen was panting with her victories, and receiving the applause of her surrounding admirers, the manager of the company entered with two constables, and charged her majesty with a breach of the peace, and instantly ordered her to the county-jail, to remain there until time, chance, or circumstance, should enable her to satisfy him for the robes of royalty she had utterly destroyed in the engagement, and other properties, which he estimated at a very considerable amount. 
It was at this instant that the misguided heroine began to perceive that she had been acting a very unprofitable part:—it was in vain for her to hope for relief; for, those very persons, who had been most instrumental in extolling her prowess as a bruiser, were now most forward in ridiculing her distresses. 
As the husband, in the awful eye of the law, is considered as forming a material part of his wife, the wretched Ghost was lifted from the ground to accompany his lady to prison, as being responsible for her errors; to which place they were conveyed amid the shouts of an unfeeling multitude, who inevitably desert the objects that have delighted them, when their power to amuse exists no more.—The poor Queen, as she was hurried away, turned about, and surveyed the scene of slaughter with such a piteous look as brought the following lines to my recollection:

"The tempest o'er, and the wild waves allay'd, 
"The calm sea wonders at the wrecks it made." 





CHAPTER XXV. 

We arrive at the metropolis.—I am discharged from the lieutenant's service.— Accosted in the street by a singular character.—Dine at a flying ordinary.— Account of my new companion. 

WHEN this theatric feud had subsided, I returned home, and found my master had retired to bed, and left orders for me to be up early in the morning, as he intended to set out for London by break of day. I obeyed his directions, and about five o'clock the next day he hired a post-chaise, into which he took me as a companion, and we set forward for the metropolis, where we arrived the same night, after a journey of twelve hours, in the prosecution of which nothing unaccountable happened. 
We took up our first night's lodging at the inn, where we were conducted by the boy who drove us, and I was awakened the next morning by a confusion of voices in the street, that, in my opinion, put all comparison at defiance. I lay, for some time, endeavouring to make out the sense of their cries; but that I found totally impossible, as every syllable they delivered was to me as unintelligible as if they had been spoken in Hebrew. 
But, if my wonder was moved by the strange voices I heard, how much more was it excited, when I got up, by the astonishing objects that I saw!—At first sight the whole world seemed to me to be concentered in that amazing city; for, in no other manner could I account for the prodigious hurry of business that was evidently carrying on in all corners of the town, and the swarms of people that crouded upon each other in succession.—The more I contemplated that vast theatre of regular confusion, the more was I inclined to liken it to an extensive bee-hive, into which the industrious members brought their honey for the advantage of the commonwealth. 
The second morning that I had passed at the inn, my master called me into the parlour, and gave me to understand that his private affairs would oblige him to go to Chatham the next day, and, as he was not quite certain of the time that he might return, he advised me to look about for another service; at the same time paying me my wages up to that month, and making me a present of a handsome compliment, over and above the amount, as a small reward, as he expressed it, for my good behaviour in his service; and, to prove that, even in the smallest particulars, he was not unmindful of my welfare, he accompanied his favours with a letter of recommendation to a relation of his, who lived in one of the new streets in Westminster, that, in case he was delayed in the country, by accident or otherwise, I might not want a friend to give me a good character. 
At this last instance of his attention I could not avoid bursting into tears, and I even offered to serve him for nothing, rather than be separated from a master, to whose interest I was so firmly attached by the strongest ties of duty and affection; but, as my application on this head was fruitless, I was obliged to wander forth in search of a new employment, with a narrow purse and a melancholy heart. 
After walking up and down the streets of the metropolis for some hours, I found myself in the neighbourhood of a place, which, on inquiry, I learned to be the Seven Dials. As my curiosity had been highly gratified by the numerous novelties that had presented themselves to my observation in the perambulations of the morning, I began to think of indulging another foolish propensity, which was, briefly, that of eating; for I found that a rebellion was forming in my intestines, and which, if not speedily overcome, would endanger the state, or, in other words, I should be confoundedly sick. 
As I stood gaping about, to find out a proper place to satisfy that irresistible demon, called hunger, I was accosted very civilly by a person, who, from his appearance altogether, struck me as an oddity.—His dress consisted of a frock that still bore the remnants of finery, but appeared to have been originally made for the accommodation of another person; a dirty silk waistcoat, with some tarnished lace; a pair of buckskin breeches, and boots; his hair, which was rather scanty, and as grey as my grandmother's, was twisted and turned up behind, under a round hat, the brims of which seemed to have been narrowed by the niggard hand of oeconomy, for the laudable purpose of making it retain its black edge as long as possible. As he stood with his back towards me at first sight, I guessed him to be a smart young buck, about twenty years of age; but, when he faced about, to enter into conversation, I perceived him to be verging on the borders of fifty, and that all his smiles and complaisance (of which he possessed a great store) had not been able to defend him against the inroads of time, for the different muscles of his visage were harrowed deep with the fell lines of care, which intersected each other at right angles. 
The polite address of this civil original at once surprised and pleased me; for, upon my informing him that I was a stranger, and wanted to know a proper place to eat in, he eagerly caught hold of my hand, and exclaimed with a laugh,  Curse me, but that's lucky for us both! for I have been meditating upon the same thing this half hour;  at the same time advising me to follow him. But we had not proceeded many paces, when he suddenly turned about, and inquired, with great earnestness, "if the captain was strong." As I did not understand the nature of his question, I stared at him with a little surprize; when he told me, with a smile, that he only wished to know how I stood for cash. I immediately pulled out the sum total of my wages; upon eyeing which he exclaimed, with the most lively transports,  Oh! damme, you are strong,—you can afford to dine like an alderman, I see;—come with me, and I'll introduce you to a house, in the next street, where you shall eat like a prince, and associate with none but gentlemen. 


I would have answered this rapid address, being fearful that he meant to bring me into too much expence; but he did not give me that opportunity; for, darting along with the celerity of an arrow from a bow, he beckoned me to follow him, and, in a few minutes, we arrived at a house where beef, mutton, and veal, decorated the outside of the windows, and from the door of which issued such savoury steams as made me anticipate in thought the delicious joints that waited our disposal within. 
Upon our entering this receptacle of the hungry, we were immediately ushered into a back room, in the center of which was a large round wooden table, and on its confines sat a number of persons, of all ages, countries, and complexions. We had scarcely saluted the company, when a dozen tongues bellowed forth at once,  How are you, Count?  and I should have been at a loss to know the person to whom so dignified a title was addressed, in such a place, if I had not seen my companion acknowledge himself as the person alluded to by various significant bows and grins, which he exercised towards his inquiring friends in a manner perfectly peculiar to himself, and unlike the rest of mankind. 
As by this time our quota of beef was placed before us, with all the appendages of salt, mustard, &amp;c. my friend advised me to fall to, and follow his example; but I, not doubting in the least that I had got into the society of some nobleman in disguise, was in a manner petrified with fear, and sat aukwardly, first surveying my plate and then my companion, my apprehensions having quite taken away my appetite, for fear I should be guilty of some impropriety before so respectable a personage. But it was far otherwise with my associate; for, though he had been accommodated with a plate of much greater magnitude than mine, and sat in a manner absolutely intrenched behind beef and cabbage, yet, wonderful to tell! in the course of five or six minutes, he made shift to demolish the whole with the most perfect ease and composure; and afterwards called for a slice of pudding, which he dispatched with the same facility; then, taking up his hat, he winked to the company, and, pulling me on one side, whispered, that he was going into the next square, where an aunt of his lived, who, by the by, would leave him more thousands than he had fingers, and that he should return immediately; but, in case that he met with a certain nobleman, whom he expected to see, and should be detained longer than ordinary, advised me to be under no sort of apprehension on that account, as he made it a point to dine at that house whenever he was disengaged from the  beau monde. 

Though I could not well understand the nature of such an apology, from a man of his seeming importance, to an humble being like me, yet I made one of my best bows, and told him I should always think myself honoured to be blessed with his society. He appeared to take this declaration in good part, and, squeezing my hand, wished the company a good day, and instantly vanished from our sight. 

He was scarcely out of the house, when I had the mortification to hear a thousand remarks made upon my friend, the count. One observed, at the same time looking at me with a significant leer, that the count was at home.— "Aye, damme," says a second, "tell me, did you ever know him out of his way?"— "No," replies a third, unless he stumbles upon a sheriff's officer."—"What, has he a dislike to the servants of justice?" says a fourth.—"Not absolutely so," rejoins a fifth, "'tis only a sort of natural antipathy, peculiar to that nobleman;— every man has his objects of aversion, and 'tis well known the count's dislike is chiefly levelled at tailors, attornies, and bum-bailiffs." 

Though I did not clearly comprehend the meaning of all their discourse, yet I understood sufficiently to inform myself, that some of their expressions were not quite so respectful as I thought a gentleman of his amiable manners was entitled to; and I was actually preparing to leave the room, when one of the persons, who sat opposite to me, asked, with great seeming concern, how long I had had the honour of being enrolled among the count's friends; upon which I related the adventure of our meeting in the next street, and the kind method that he had taken to shew me a house of entertainment to satisfy the cravings of my stomach. — "Aye, aye," replies the person who questioned me, "the count, it must be allowed, is a very civil gentleman, but he generally thinks fit to confine this essential part of his good breeding to strangers."—"And foreigners, you will allow," cries another.—"Yes," rejoins the person who spoke first, "but that gentleman is no foreigner."—  Done  for a guinea he is," replies the other.— "Done,"  says his antagonist; and immediately addressing himself to me, with great earnestness, asked, with many apologies for his impertinence, where I was born. I told him, without hesitation, in Ireland.—"There, damme, gentlemen," roars the person who proposed the wager, "I knew I was right, by G—d."—"Right!" says the other, "how can that be!—we all know that Ireland is but an extraneous part of England;—isn't it, sir?" says he, looking me full in the face.— "Yes, sir," replied I, half dead with confusion. — Upon which there was a general roar of applause, and each of the opponents, taking me by the hand, (which they shook with great violence, in token of their approbation,) declared, that I was a damned honest fellow, and they should be proud to be better known to me. I received this condescension in good part, and made them a low bow. 
Here the discourse took another turn, in pursuing which they handled the character of the count with so little mercy, that I began to entertain some doubts of his quality. — But all these ideas, which I began to form to his disadvantage, vanished at the approach of the lady of the house, who informed me that I owed her five-pence for my eatables, and eight-pence for the count's; when I pulled out my scanty pittance, and discharged the reckoning, happy in having an opportunity of dining with a person of such distinction at so cheap a rate; for, as I heard the landlady mention his title, I had no longer any mistrust relative to his character in life; and, assuming a little effrontery, I asked the gentleman who sat next me if the count was a man of fortune.—"Oh! prodigious!" answered the other.— His estate is in England, I presume, sir," says I.—"No," says a queer-looking old man, whom I had not noticed before, "it's neither here nor there, friend." I was calling all my geographical learning to my aid, to find out that country, when another observed, that, to his certain knowledge, he was in possession of some of the finest lands in all Sclavonia.—"Oh! then, I suppose he's a German nobleman," replied I. —"He is," says the other, "and one of the most ancient in the whole circle of the empire."—Upon which I got up, took my hat, and saluted the company; which mark of respect, on my part, they all returned with tenfold interest; and then I issued forth from the house, highly gratified at the honour of so distinguished an acquaintance, which I resolved to cultivate with all the address in my power. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

A grain of prudence more profitable than a pound of vanity.—The curiosity of the public is no proof of their sagacity.— Popular rage more dreadful than the sting of the law. — A great man in distress.—My reason blinded by my ambition.—Our reception at a porter-house. 

ELATED with my success, and prodigiously vain of those abilities which had been the primary cause, as I imagined, of attaching so great a man to my interest, I began to form a thousand schemes for the improvement of my fortune; and could not help reviving the memory of my poor father and mother, who had taken such care of my education, that, should any of the count's friends think proper to employ me in the capacity of a steward, or otherwise, I was intirely fit for their service. — I had strolled through several streets, so absolutely wrapped up in my my reflexions on my future greatness that I scarce heeded or knew where, or on what purpose, I was going, till I came to the corner of a lane, when an accident happened that broke asunder the texture of my reveries. 
I was walking along, with my arms enfolded in each other, and my head reclining on my breast, in deep contemplation, when I received a blow from the end of a ladder, which two men were bringing round the corner, that not only stunned, and deprived me, in an instant, of all powers of sensation, but, by the force of the blow, drove me backwards, at least ten paces, when I unluckily staggered against a tub that stood at the edge of the cellar of a public house, where some draymen were starting porter, which, giving way, accompanied me in the fall, which was at least six feet perpendicular, and I fell plump into an empty butt, which stood ready to be drawn up. 
The noise, which the tub and I had occasioned in our descent, drew together all the people out of the alehouse to explore the cause; when, lo! poor Tony was discovered lying motionless at the bottom of the vessel. Every means was immediately put in practice to relieve me from so uncomfortable a situation; and, having dragged me up the stairs once more into the regions of day, they brought me into the middle of the tap-room, where a barber, who was present, undertook to bleed me, while another poured a glass of brandy-hot down my throat, in order to restore me to my strength and spirits. 
Whether it was owing to the operations of nature, or the beneficial effects of the prescriptions of my physicians, that I recovered, remains, to this hour, undetermined; but certain it is that my spirits were re-established, and I was again enabled to pursue those avocations in life which were eventually to lead me into the temple of fortune.—As I walked along, the pain in my head, which my late disaster had occasioned, in a great measure reduced that felicity I should otherwise have enjoyed, in consequence of the pleasurable notions I had conjured up in my brain since my rencounter with the Sclavonian beau. 
But I hardly knew to what point of the compass I was steering, when I arrived at a large stone gate, through which an immense number of coaches and carts were passing, without intermission; and my ears were dinned with a continual noise and uproar, made up of the bawling of dustmen, the rattling of carriages, and the oaths and execrations of coachmen and carmen contending, for priority of place, with as much vehemence and bitterness as if the contest was the most important circumstance of their lives. 
As I stood contemplating that scene of blasphemy, I was surrounded by a number of idle people, who were listening to the strains of a ballad-singer, the tenor of whose song I perceived administered great pleasure to the auditory around her. I had scarcely been attentive above two minutes, before I heard sufficient to make me blush from ear to ear with confusion; and, skulking, unperceived, from the croud, I made the best of my way down the street, lamenting the defects of a police that permitted such public incitements to debauchery, wounding the morals of the rising generation, and annoying the ears of modesty, to be sung about the greatest avenues of the capital with impunity. 
Full of these reflexions for the public good, I strayed along the path, till my progress was interrupted by a collection of men, women, and children, who were gaping, with their mouths wide open, at a wonderful piece of mechanism, affixed against a church, where two automaton figures, they informed me, would strike the quarters. I was wonderfully incited to be present at the operation, and, placing myself in the center, just opposite the scene of action, waited for the accomplishment of my desires with the most ardent curiosity. But, ere that event took place, the whole assembly was thrown into confusion by the detection of a pick-pocket, who had been making somewhat too free with the purse of a lady that formed a part of the inquisitive group. 
When the culprit was brought forward, his appearance was altogether such as struck me with astonishment; for, conceive what my surprize must be, who had always thought that a thief bore his credentials to roguery in his forehead, to behold a slim young man, dressed, at all points, in the utmost extravagance of the fashion, and who protested his innocence in terms of the most elegant language, handled by a merciless mob as one of the fraternity of the lowest order of human villains; nay, I was in my own mind so perfectly convinced of the falsehood of the charge, that I felt myself frequently impelled to step forward in his defence; and I actually should have done so, if a very respectable gentleman had not declared that he was the most notorious pick-pocket about town. 
As I was eager to be present at the punishment of a delinquent, whom the laws of the land seem tacitly to exclude from their protection, I followed the tattered cavalcade, who proceeded with their prisoner, close guarded, to the water-side; where, after taking him to some neighbouring barges that were laden with coals, they plunged him, unrestrained by a single emotion of pity, into the sable stream, where he was forced to remain for upwards of twenty minutes, floundering for his life amidst a congregation of filth, disembogued from all corners of the metropolis, and interlarded with dead cats, drowned puppies, stinking fish, and other offensive matter, more abhorrent to the sense of smelling than all the essence of Pandora's cabinet. When he had undergone a sufficient share of punishment for his mal-practices, a tender-hearted waterman,
"Touch'd with a generous sense of human woe," 

took the poor devil into his boat, and rowed away with the fallen understrapper of Mercury amid the discordant groans of the million that crouded the shores of old Thames. 
As the evening was now approaching very fast, I thought it prudent to make the best of my way back to the inn, being a stranger in town, and not knowing where to procure a lodging immediately. I was on my way thither, resolving to get up early the next morning to deliver my letter to my late master's friend in Westminster, and afterwards to meet the count, agreeable to appointment, at the eating-house near the Seven Dials. 
But, luckily, as I came to the foot of Blackfriers Bridge, I met my noble acquaintance once more. The rencounter happened as follows.—I saw a mob of people collecting very fast, at a little distance from the place I was passing; and, hearing some very high words pass, I walked up to inquire into the cause, when I beheld a woman, of a very vulgar appearance, who had fastened one hand in the collar of a gentleman, whom she was dragging along the pavement, while, with the other, she was threatening to knock him down, if he made the least resistance; and he, in the most piteous manner, was intreating the croud to take his part. 
I was pushing the people on one side, to inquire more fully into the matter, when I beheld, to my utter grief and surprise, that the unfortunate hero was no other than the very individual count, who had behaved with such politeness to me in the preceding part of the day. I was so enraged to see the only gentleman I had met with since my landing in England, who, in my opinion, possessed either tenderness or urbanity, treated in such a rude manner, that I instantaneously lifted up my stick to strike the furious Amazon to the earth, in order to liberate my friend; but I presently found my arms were pinioned behind me by the mob, who reprobated my conduct, for endeavouring to rescue a man who had refused to pay his lawful debts. This charge made me fire with such rage that I could not avoid telling the fellow, who advanced it, that it was a lie; for the gentleman was my friend, and not only a man of honour but likewise of great fortune. This last expression roused the attention of the woman who had him in custody, and she instantly retorted, "He a man of fortune! —he be damned, a poor, half-starved, would-be, gentleman; — the devil take such mungrels, I say; — why don't he pay me my bill? — answer me that."—"And so he will, I am sure," replied I, "if your demand is a just one."—"Just!" says the furious gentlewoman, "and who are you, pray, that take upon you to dispute the justice of the matter, I should be glad to know?—will you pay his bill for him?"—"Aye, my dear friend, do," said the count, "and I shall be for ever devoted to your service;— it is but a trifle, only nine shillings and seven pence, upon my soul."— Yes," says his persecutress, "and it has been due these nine months for my hard labour."—Here the count desired to speak to me, and whispered in my ear that it was a trifling bill for washing, which he had incurred just before his last remittance from abroad, and that ever since it had slipped his memory; but he requested me, for the love of God, to pay the money, if I had it about me, and not let him suffer such a public disgrace any longer. 
I felt my bowels of compassion incline very much to serve the disastrous nobleman, and involuntarily pulled out all the cash I had left except one guinea, which I had formerly sewed up in the waistband of my breeches, to stand my friend in case of any sudden emergency. When the scarlet-faced laundress saw me pull out my money, in obedience to the count's intreaties, she quitted her prey, and I paid her the amount of her bill. When she had fingered the cash, after looking in my face with a significant eye, she burst into a loud laugh, and, taking her leave, wished me joy of my new acquaintance. 
As this disagreeable business was now settled, and the count emancipated from his fears, we thought of retiring to some house in the neighbourhood, to settle the plan of operations for the ensuing day.—I was looking about me, in search of a beer-drinking  caravansera,  when my facetious associate, taking me under the arm, informed me that he would conduct me to a house, not very far from us, where the porter was good and the company excellent. 
As we proceeded along, I ventured to make my companion acquainted with the reduced state of my finances, and the little hope I had of recruiting it until I should get into some service. At the word  service  the count stared, and said, he conceived it impossible that a person of my accomplishments could think of subjecting himself to the whims and caprice of the first prince in Christendom; besides, added he, your education, I perceive, is liberal, your manners polite, and your person irresistible. —"Damme," adds the count, putting a glass to his eye, and surveying me from head to foot, "if I ever saw a prettier, tighter, lighter, more genteel, bit of humanity in the three kingdoms.— Oh! zounds!" continues he, "you must put the notion of servitude intirely out of your head, unless it is that of the ladies:—why, man," says he, "I'll introduce you to a circle of the first-rate toasts in the capital, all prodigious fortunes, and there's no doubt but you may marry the first woman you take a liking to." 
Though I was charmed to extasy with the count's extravagant flattery of my person and mental endowments, of which I conceived no very contemptible idea myself, yet I could not resist pointing out to my companion some small impediments, which I imagined fate would throw in my way to bar the progress of my good fortune, namely, that of proper clothes to appear in. But I had scarcely hinted my doubts, when he kindly informed me that his wardrobe was intirely at my service, where I might pick and choose out of all the colours of the rainbow; at the same time asking me what colour I thought most advantageous to my complexion; and, upon my answering I thought blue was as becoming as any, he told me, with a face of deep concern, that he was cursedly mortified that the blue could not be had, for he had given it away but the morning before to a half-pay lieutenant, with a wife and seven children.—"Oh! my dear sir," rejoined I, "don't trouble yourself, the scarlet will do very well."—"The scarlet, you said," says the count.—"Yes," I replied, "if it was agreeable to him."—"Why, my dear friend," rejoins the beau, "it is perfectly agreeable, but, damn it, at present it's totally impossible; for I lent that very coat last week to a gentleman of my acquaintance to go to the opera; his own tailor, you must know, having disappointed him, though the scoundrel knew he was to be introduced that evening to a young beauty from Devonshire, with a fortune of thirty thousand pounds."— Well, well, sir, the first that comes to hand, then, will satisfy me," added I.—"Will it?—damme, now, but that's kind," says the count, squeezing my hand, "this is behaving like a true friend; you shall certainly be welcome to the first fuit that comes to my hands, I assure you." 
The repeated excuses of my companion, added to a certain shabbiness of attire, awakened some doubts in my mind relative to his quality, which I could not intirely stifle, notwithstanding his apparent good-breeding and superabundant complaisance; but, as my knowledge of the world was as yet very limited, and, foolishly imagining that the language of the tongue could be coined in no other mint but the heart, I did not know but the count's attachment to old clothes was somewhat like mine to an old friend, because he could put them on and off without much ceremony. However, coming at last to the corner of a narrow court, badly paved and offensively dirty, we turned up it, and entered a public house by a descent of three steps from the street. Here I found likewise that my friend, to borrow a phrase of his own, was perfectly "at home;" for the whole congregation, recognizing his person immediately, saluted him by the familiar appellation of "Count, how are you?" I must own that the unbridled familiarity of such a vulgar group, towards a person of his rank in life, gave an additional wound to my faith relative to his quality and importance, and I resolved to seize the first opportunity of satisfying my scruples upon that head. 




CHAPTER XXVII.  


A proof of the ease with which great men can reconcile themselves to low company.—The pleasures of conviviality.—My apprehensions of sleeping in the street removed by the count's friendship.—Amused with a tale of a tub.—Find myself made an egregious ass. 

BY the smiles of the landlady towards my companion, I perceived that he was no less than a warm favourite in her eye; for she came out of the bar, in which she had hitherto been engaged, accommodating a tailor's lady with a pint of geneva, and ushered us into a back room, the door of which was scarcely opened, when there issued forth such abundant volumes of smoke as could hardly be surpassed in the avenues of the infernal regions. 
When we had taken our seats in this den of oblivion, (for the appellation of room it certainly did not deserve,) the clouds began to dissipate, that had made every object in the room impervious to my view, and I found myself flanked on each side with a society of mirth-inspiring mortals, who, by the trifling assistance of a pipe and a song, seemed to have totally excluded care from their magic cavern. After I was formally introduced to the society by my friend, as an honest fellow and a  bon vivant,  we took our seats round the table of Anacreon; and the president of the evening commanded silence for a favourite catch, which was delivered, in high style, by three of the members. After this followed a sentiment, which, as it savoured infinitely more of wit than decency, I shall forbear to repeat. 
When it came to the count's turn to sing, he instantly gave them the well-known ditty of "Death and the Lady" in character, and interlarded it with such inimitable strokes of comic humour and expression of countenance, as made me well nigh burst with laughter. At the conclusion of this effort of the count's, the whole circle congratulated him upon the extensiveness of his risible powers. 
Now it came to my turn to make an offering at the shrine of Comus, and I was requested by the president, in the name of the company, to favour them with a song. I made every apology to excuse the performance which my ingenuity could suggest, but found myself so hard pressed by the intreaties of my companions that I must have complied, if a good-natured young man, who sat at my left hand, and who perceived the embarrassment the request had thrown me into, had not voluntarily offered, with my permission, to become my substitute. As this proposal was backed by a few well-timed observations by the count, I was excused, and the business of the evening went forward as usual. 
When it grew late, and the company began to drop off one by one, I communicated to my boon associate the necessity I was under of going to bed, and likewise told him of the engagement I had to fulfil the next day; but he comforted me, by the assurance that he would take care and find me a proper night's lodging. With this declaration I remained satisfied, as I was convinced that he must know the town much better than I possibly could, who had scarcely breathed in it above twenty-four hours. 
As the bowl of punch, over which we held this argument, was now demolished, it was proposed to fill another, to which I offered some slight objections that were instantly over-ruled by the count, who, wholly regardless of my remarks, ordered it to be replenished, and then, whispering in my ear, informed me, that he would introduce me to the friendship of the young fellow who kindly sang in my room; who, he assured me, was a person well worth my acquaintance, and who would prove of great service to me in the pursuits which he intended I should follow, as soon as I had received a little of the polish, necessary to cut any thing like a capital figure in life. I thanked him for this new instance of his regard; and, agreeably to his word, he recommended me, in the most forcible manner, to the protection of his friend; having previously whispered him, as I supposed, to excuse the bashfulness of my demeanour. 
Were I to set down one half of the compliments which were paid to the graces of my person, by the count and my new ally, during the demolition of the punch, you would naturally imagine that I was the vainest of all human beings; for, while one was praising the ringlets of hair that flowed loosely down my back, the other discovered that I had the best-turned ancle and the neatest leg he ever saw; observations, to which I gave full credit, as I really had some cause to value myself upon the symmetry of my limbs; and so much was I bewildered by the excessive incense of their flattery, that I did not perceive what was going forward till the landlady had absolutely made another bowl, and placed it on the table before us. Now the apprehensions for my health overcame every other consideration; for, not being accustomed to keep such late hours, and, besides, finding that the fumes of the liquor had mounted into my upper story, or, in other words, that my brain was affected, I made a motion for departing. But this the count absolutely forbade, and painted the dangers so forcibly, which a stranger to the manners of the town had to expect from walking, at such a late hour of the night, alone, that I trembled in idea, and began to use every persuasion to induce him to accompany me, which at last he promised to comply with as soon as he had demolished the liquor which so invitingly courted his embraces. 
Here the count took an opportunity of informing our common friend to what purpose he meant to dedicate my personal accomplishments, which was no other than to have me introduced to the notice of some ladies of fortune and distinction, of his acquaintance, and, by the aid of a little manoeuvring, enforced by the beauties of my person, to snap up some young tit of quality, whose fortune would make me independent for life. I was so elated with this uncommon zeal of the count for my happiness, that my eyes swam with tears of gratitude and joy;—I thanked him in the most extravagant and lively terms of language, promising to obey his directions in every particular of my life; and would have prostrated myself at his feet, and called upon Heaven to reward his friendly heart, had he not absolutely insisted upon the contrary. 
Now, the watchman giving us notice that it was between two and three o'clock in the morning, it was judged expedient to pay our reckoning, and depart in peace; and, upon the landlady's approach with her bill, I told her we would settle as soon as our companion returned; for, upon our mentioning the word  payment,  I had observed he took his hat and slipped out of the room. Here she thought proper to set me right, by assuring me that the gentleman we alluded to had been gone home above these ten minutes, and, probably, that she might not set eyes upon him for three months to come, and if she never did again she should not break her heart. Upon receiving this unwelcome intelligence, I asked who was to pay his part; to which she replied, that was a matter we should have settled among ourselves before he thought proper to decamp;— that she should look to me for the money, which I must pay her immediately, for she had a heavy bill to make up for her distiller, whom she expected to call the next day, and could not afford to lose her moderate profits in compliment to any vagabond upon earth. 
Finding no resource left but by paying the money, I asked for her bill, which amounting to six shillings and nine-pence more than I had in my pocket, I turned about to consult the count what measure we must follow in this miserable dilemma, when, to my utter astonishment, I found he was gone also; however, imagining that he would shortly return, I sat in the utmost impatience, meaning that he should pass his word with the woman of the house for the remainder. But, having sat a considerable time, and no count appearing, I told the woman that I had not money sufficient to discharge the bill totally, but that I would give her what I had, and that my friend should be answerable for the remainder. — "What friend, pray?" says the lady of the bar.—"The count," answered I. —"The count!" replied she, in accents of disdain,  yes, yes, he is a pretty fellow, indeed, to pass his word!— why, my good friend, I don't know whether you're serious or not; but, give me leave to tell you, that I wou'dn't take his word, no, nor his oath neither, for six farthings, much less for six shillings. —Here my choler rose, to hear my friend's character so villanously traduced; and, assuming all the importance I was able, I told her, she ought to be ashamed of mentioning the name of so accomplished a gentleman with disrespect.—"A gentleman, indeed!" replied the angry hostess, "a rascal, you mean! — why, he's as poor as a half-pay officer, and doesn't eat a dinner above three times a week, and that's at the expence of some credulous fool or another." 

At this relation of the landlady's the blood forsook my cheeks, and an universal panic seized my whole frame; for, comparing the positiveness of her assertions with the apparent poverty of my companion and the shabbiness of his habiliments, I could not help giving full credit to her tale, though it was at the expence of my discernment as a man, and my dearest hopes for ever. The woman, perceiving my situation, and the callow innocence of my mind, offered to take what money I had about me, and a pledge for the remainder, until it should be convenient for me to call to discharge the whole. I was happy to comply even with this accommodation of the matter; and, after giving her all my cash, and depositing my silver shoe-buckles for the rest, I took my leave, and wandered forth in the streets of an unbounded and flagitious metropolis, to whose customs I was almost an entire stranger, at the dismal hour of three in the morning, without a penny in my pocket, or a friend to direct my steps; and continually ruminating on the complicated vices of mankind, which I found were hourly spread to delude the unthinking and unwary. 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

I go to the assistance of a woman in distress.—Pay an unseasonable visit to the round-house. — Almost frightened to death with the apprehensions of being hanged.—Another rencounter.—Am carried before a justice, and relieved from my troubles.—Apostrophe on my last guinea. 

AS I went along, musing on the iniquities of the world, my ears were assailed with the cries of a female. I no sooner heard the voice of distress than my feelings took the alarm, being always eager to remove the sorrows of any, but particularly a woman's. When I came to the place of action, I found a poor creature on the ground, struggling with a man, who struck at her several times; but, the moment her eyes caught my approach, she prayed, for the love of Jesus, that I would assist her. On such an occasion I never wanted any other monitor than my humanity, and, guided by that impulse, I entered into her quarrel with such zeal and activity, that, in less than ten minutes, I laid her oppressor breathless at my feet. 
The noise of our combat had attracted the notice of some watchmen, who, gathering round us, made an inquiry into the nature of such a breach of the peace at that dead hour of the night. I was going to inform them of the true state of the matter, when the vanquished hero, who lay bleeding in the street, charged the watch to take me into custody, as a villain who wanted to rob and murder him. The words had scarcely escaped his lips, when I was secured by these honest descendents of Time, who, tally regardless of all my protestations to the contrary, conveyed me to the watch-house, accompanied by the wretch who had accused me, with his face and clothes besmeared all over with blood. As for the girl, in whose defence I had thus risked my life and liberty, she had thought proper to decamp as fast as possible from the scene of the affray, having solid reasons to dislike the society of a watchman, and a natural antipathy to the inside of a house of correction. 
When we had made our entrance into the watch-house, I was brought before the constable of the night, whom we found in an inner room, enjoying himself with a pot of porter and a pipe, and assisted in the duties of his holy office by a drunken buck, who had taken up his night's lodging in the round-house, to see life, and enjoy a bit of sun. When the fellow, whom I had beaten, had exhibited his charge against me, in which he was supported by the watchmen, the constable, assuming all the magisterial dignity he was able, turning to me, said,  Well, you dog, what have you to say in your defence?  Frightened out of my senses at being brought to a tribunal of justice, I confessed the whole matter, from beginning to end, and had the consolation to understand, from the inebriate gentleman who sat by the watch-house fire, and who perceived my ignorance of the town, that I should certainly be hanged, for that there was not a shadow of doubt but the man would die. If he had taken a pistol and shot me through the head, it could not have more completely deprived me of the powers of sensation: — I stood, for some minutes, motionless as a statue; at length my tears made way for my relief, and I wept, with the utmost contrition, for the horror of an act that would not only take away the life of a fellow-creature, but involve my own in its dreadful consequences. 
I had scarcely dried my eyes, when a man, of a very genteel aspect, entered with a ragged prostitute, whom he charged with having privately robbed him of his watch. It appeared, in the course of her examination, that she had conveyed it to a watchman, who, it seemed, went shares in her profits, and who advised her, in case the gentleman should return and claim his property, to charge him as having attempted to use her ill, and by that means oblige him not only to relinquish all farther claim to the trinket they had pilfered, but to purchase his release at a very considerable amount. But the gentleman, who was a rigid observer of the laws, was so far from being intimidated by the threats of the woman, or the apprehensions of appearing publicly on such a business in a court of justice, that he made it a point to have her secured, in spite of the manoeuvres of her friend and his fraternity. Upon her confessing the whole affair, and giving up the watchman as her colleague, who restored the gentleman his watch upon a previous promise of pardon, he consented to let her go; declaring, at the same time, that he should have found an uncommon satisfaction in bringing so infamous a villain, as the rascally retainer of time, to public justice. 
As the petty feuds of the night are not to be discussed in watch-houses without some copious oblations to the shrine of Bacchus, the gentleman, in conformity to so laudable and established a custom, ordered a bottle of wine, over which the constable, the buck, and himself, sat discoursing for an hour, to the great joy of all the disturbers of the night; for the presiding magistrate was a man of such a convivial kidney as would not be called from the enjoyment of his bottle to settle the claims of justice, if they were even demanded by the first man in the kingdom. 

After passing a most comfortless and horrid night, about nine in the morning I was taken up to one of the rotation-offices, and examined relative to the bloody charges exhibited against me:—I trembled all the way, and went to this mock-tribunal of legislative authority like a criminal under sentence of death; for I verily believed the hour was now arrived when I should end all my miseries by an ignominious death. But, fortunately, a circumstance took place at the office that changed my apprehensions into transports. Previous to our arrival, a gentleman, who had been robbed the week before on Hounslow Heath, had attended the examination of two men, who were taken up on suspicion of being guilty of the robbery; but, finding they were not the persons who had committed the fact, he was coming down the steps of the door, on his departure, when he met the whole troop, who were conducting me and my accuser before the sitting magistrate. Anxious to learn the cause of a piece of business so apparently dreadful, he turned back, and, just as I and the villain who had charged me falsely were brought to the bar, the gentleman, pointing to my prosecutor, exclaimed with a strong emphasis, like Nathan in holy writ, "Thou art the man!"— "What man?" replied the justice.— "The man who committed the robbery," says the gentleman. Upon the strength of his authority, the villain, who was endeavouring to harrass me for exercising the feelings of a Christian, was, in his turn, secured and examined; in the course of which he owned the commission of the fact, and in the confusion of his mind acknowledged that I had neither robbed or in any manner ill-used him, but ratified, in every particular, the account I had previously delivered before the constable of the night. In consequence of the happy issue of this woe-fraught adventure I was immediately set at liberty, and the poor devil, whose bones I had so belaboured in the morning, was handcuffed and conveyed to prison, to await, in durance vile, the awful sentence of the law. 
When I found myself once more unrestrained, and in the middle of the street, at liberty to follow which path I liked best, I thought my heart would have leaped through my ribs for joy. My extacies were, indeed, somewhat allayed by the recollection that I had not a sixpence in my purse, but yet not sufficiently so to make me sad; for all ideas relative to money became now but a secondary consideration in my scale of felicity, and that circumstance, which would have made me wretched the day before, was now absorbed in the self-congratulations of escape from so perilous a situation:—so much does the happiness of our lives, as well as the beauty of objects, depend upon opposition. 
As the perturbation of my spirits began to subside, a sense of the misfortunes that still hovered round me began to operate with accumulated force. I knew not whither to turn my steps to procure a dinner, much less all those comforts of which I had been deprived by the silly expenditure of my money in the pursuit of a shadow. In the bitterness of my anguish I cursed the hour that had first made me acquainted with the count, whom I now considered as the primary cause of all my woe, and vowed revenge, if ever time and opportunity brought him within my reach. 
As I was musing deeply on the hard rubs of fortune that I had experienced, I luckily thought of the guinea which I had formerly sewed up in my waistband; and, instantly ripping it open with a pen-knife, I seized the hidden treasure, which I kissed with the rapture of a zealot; and, ere I put my resolutions in practice, which were to buy a pair of cheap shoe-buckles, and a few other indispensible personal necessaries, I could not help uttering the following rhapsody to my last guinea: — And shall I never see thee more, thou lovely minister of all my pleasures?—without thy powerful assistance the goodly fruits, that issue from the womb of Nature, are tasteless, joyless, and insipid;— it is you alone can chear the human heart, and raise it from despondency; —you visit us as the harbinger of delight, and all the graces that adorn our state are crouding in thy train;— thy influence, more potent than the blandishments of beauty, can turn aside the stream of justice, shake the monarch on his imperial throne, and, by thy strength of argument, confound and destroy the long-prescribed distinctions, which equity and wisdom have erected on the precincts of right and wrong. — Alas! how ineffectual is merit, if not supported by your smiles! like the floweret in the Arabian desert, it blossoms unregarded and perishes unknown.—The love of thee even supersedes that of fame; for proud man would cease to be a hero, and the artist to be immortalized by the labours of his pencil, if cut off from the genial hope of thy embraces.—If Providence, in her bounteous dispensations, meant you as a blessing, why were you distributed with so unequal a hand? But, on the contrary, my reason assures me, that you were sent us as a curse, to poison the fountain of human excellence, to vitiate the heart, and shake the peace of society. The force of reflexion having dissipated my prejudices, I will lament thy loss no more, but chearfully resign thee, thou baneful minister of human evil, to the insatiate hand of avarice and ambition, and, living obedient to the dictates of morality, endeavour to be happy by the exercise of virtue. 


END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 










VOL. III. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

Meet with a mortifying disappointment.— An extraordinary character.—He gives some very important advice.—I experience one of the ill consequences of being too warm in an argument.—Find the wisest men are subject to particular weaknesses.—Meet with a poet.—He delivers an opinion not much to the credit of human nature. 

WHEN I had purchased the articles of dress that I stood in need of, I inquired the nearest way to Westminster, where my late master's friend, the lieutenant, lived, to whom I had a letter of recommendation; and, by the assistance of various persons, who were kind enough to shew me the way, I made a sort of a zig-zag movement towards the place of destination. But, unfortunately for me, when I came there I heard that the gentleman was gone in the country but the day before; and an old woman, who was left as the guardian dragon of his furniture in his absence, informed me, for my comfort, that she did not expect him to return to town for at least two months. This intelligence was another thunderbolt of fate that drove me still nearer to the cave of despair; however, wishing her a good morning, I assumed new courage, and resolved to keep up my spirits as well as I could, not doubting but that I should shortly arrive at the end of all my inquietude. 
Buoyed up by this idea, I continued whistling an old tune till I found myself at a gate, which led into a row of trees, and this place, on inquiry, I found to be St. James's Park. When I had sauntered about a considerable time, I sat down on one of the benches in the Mall, and continued there for some minutes in a state of insensibility, with my hands in my breeches-pockets, and my head reclined against a tree. I was exactly in this position, when an odd sort of a figure came and sat down on the same seat. He was a tall, athletic, man, with a black visage, thick lips, and rather meanly attired; but, notwithstanding which, there was an air of politeness in his demeanour, and such marks of philanthropy in his countenance, that he attracted my respect by a sort of involuntary impulse. 
He had scarcely sat down three minutes before he entered into conversation with me, by asking with a smile, which seemed equally to partake of good-humour and concern,  What makes you look so serious, my lad?  I told him, with a low bow, that I was not well.—"I am sorry for it," said the stranger;  but tell me now, without disguise, is the disease situated in your body or your mind? —I answered him, with a deep sigh, that it lay intirely in my mind.—"Does it?" replied he,  well, my lad, I'll be your physician on this occasion; but, contrary to the general rules of practice, I shall administer without a fee, and my medicines, though salutary, are not expensive.—But, first, tell me what religion you profess, for I perceive, by your tongue, that you are a native of Ireland.  When I informed him that I was educated agreeably to the established church of that country, he took my hand with seeming rapture, and professed himself, very warmly, my friend; then, taking a little book out of his pocket, he presented it to me with these words:— I give you this, my young friend," said he, "to learn by heart, which I conjure you to do immediately:—you will find it contain some prayers that you must repeat in the course of the day, according to the order in which they are set down. Do that, and pray to God to bless you, and depend upon it all will go well. For, the evils we experience in this life originate from two causes; the first is, by neglecting our daily worship of the Almighty; and the second is, by not knowing ourselves; for, if we knew ourselves, my young friend, we should have no occasion for the rigorous exercise of those severities, which the wisdom of men finds it necessary to put in force for the well-being of each other; but, losing sight of those great beacons of our felicity, we suffer ourselves to be driven about by the tempest of our passions, until we are eventually lost for ever.—I hope, my lad," continues he, "that my advice has made a proper impression upon your heart: — you look like a good-natured young man, and I dare take upon me to assert that you will profit by my instructions. 

The imposition of the pious pedlar, of whom mention is made in the former part of this history, was still so fresh in my recollection, that I could scarcely muster up words enough to tell him that I was obliged to him: (so much do the actions of the unworthy part of human nature place us on our guard against the professions of the best:) however, I promised him to read his book with attention, which pleased him so much, that, seizing the button of my coat, he began to give me a short history of his life, in which I was informed, that he was a major in the army, on half-pay; and that the whole business of his life was to succour the distressed, and take such poor wretches under his protection, as, from their poverty, or other causes, were deprived of every temporal comfort, and obliged to seek for happiness in the contemplation of eternity. 
He was proceeding to give me the history of a poor woman he had been to see that very morning, who had been deprived of her senses as well as property by the villany of an attorney, when the narrative was interrupted by a gentleman, who tapped the major on the shoulder with great familiarity; and, placing himself on the bench, they entered into mutual inquiries about their private affairs, to my great joy and satisfaction: for I should have remarked, that the military reformer of manners laboured under exactly the same impediment, in point of delivery, as the celebrated Demosthenes, and was obliged to deposit three or four large stones in his mouth before he could make himself understood; and the good man, in the midst of his zeal for my happiness, talked so fast and so vehemently, that the stones dropped one by one out of his mouth, unperceived, and he was actually reduced to a dependence on a single pebble for his powers of elocution when the person beforementioned came to my relief. And, indeed, that circumstance was particularly fortunate to me; for the major had first griped fast hold of my button, to prevent my escape from his admonitions, (which, though very pious, were not extremely pleasant,) and then he put his mouth close to my face, and so bespattered me with spittle, that, before he would have got half through his story, I probably should not have had an eye left, or been able to have distinguished an object at a yard distance. 
But my attention was now engaged by a severe conflict between the major and his acquaintance, which I could perceive derived its source from a difference in political principles; the major being a strenuous advocate for the privileges of the people, and the other equally as violent for the prerogative of majesty. In the course of this debate I was somewhat concerned to find the major lose sight of that equanimity of disposition, which I imagined was the natural concomitant of a mind so well regulated as his. After a few polite bickerings they both left their seats in great perturbation, and walked up the Mall, to finish and adjust their political disputation. 
They had scarcely left the bench, when the vacancy was filled by a meagre, thin, man, in a thread-bare black coat, who approached with one hand deposited in his bosom, and the other in his waistcoat-pocket. He wore a small hat, which partly covered a tie-wig without powder, that seemed, by the appearance of the caul in various places, to have seen almost as many days as its master. He wore likewise a black stock, which, by the careful manner in which he had buttoned his coat to the top, gave me strong suspicion to imagine, that, from a rigid principle of either prudence or poverty, he made it answer all the purposes of a shirt; for I could not trace the smallest vestige of that necessary appendage of a man's dress through any of those apertures which the iron hand of time had made in his suit of sable.—His beard was at once gristly and grey, and appeared to have been unmolested by the razor for at least a week; which, added to the pale aspect of his weather-beaten face, made him altogether no indifferent representation of the figure of famine. When he had taken his seat, he seemed to retire within himself with a sort of sullen dignity, and bore a kind of  noli-me-tangere  on his forehead, that tacitly forbade all human communication. 
I don't know exactly to what motive to attribute it, but, certainly, I never felt a stronger curiosity take place in my breast than did at that time to know the history of this seeming original. Thrice I made advances to speak to him, but was as often instantly frozen by the uncharitable contraction of his muscles. At length an occasion offered of doing him an inconsiderable service, which I did not suffer to pass unheeded.—I observed that he had taken a small bundle of papers from his bosom, which he looked at for some time with great earnestness, till a silent tear, stealing from his eye, sullied his manly cheek; but, eager to wipe away so frail a testimony of his weakness, he felt in his pocket, with great trepidation, for a handkerchief, and, in his hurry, dropped those papers, which had moved him to so public and expressive an indication of his sorrow and chagrin. I immediately leaped from my seat, and, taking up the bundle, delivered it to him with all that delicacy of address and tenderness of manner, which should ever accompany our actions, when we mean to pour the balm of consolation into the wounds of the unfortunate. He seemed pleased with the respect I paid him, and, gently bowing towards me, so far descended from the majesty of genius as to offer me a pinch of snuff, from a paltry iron box, as a recompence for my civility, which I accepted with rapture as an overture of friendship. 
After a few mutual inquiries, the understrapper of Apollo opened his circumstances as follows.—"I am," said the wretched man,  a poor, but faithful, servant of the Muses, and have been wandering about the plains of Parnassus for the last thirty years of my life, gathering laurels to adorn my tomb, but have found the journey so painful, and the profit so scanty, that, had I known the inconveniences before I set forward in the pursuit, I should scarcely have had the hardiness to encounter such complicated perils of fatigue to have acquired the reputation even of a Homer. 

Emboldened by this free declaration on the part of the poet, I told him, that I presumed those papers, which he held in his hand, were some children of his brain, that he doubtless meant to favour the world with in due time.—"Ah!" replied this literary veteran,  you guess right as to my intention, I do mean to publish them; but of what importance is the possession of the most brilliant talents, if you want friends to bring you into reputation?—you may perish in a garret with the abilities of an Otway. —I told him, that I always conceived a work of merit would sufficiently recommend itself.—  Aye, my dear friend," says the bard, that observation proves you to be a very young man indeed; when you have acquired a little more experience, you will see, that, in nine instances out of ten, the retinue of folly overcome the inheritors of genius. If a noble lord, or a great man, has a fool in the family, who wishes to be celebrated as a wit, it follows, as naturally as the night succeeds the day, that he must be supported in his pretensions at the expence of reason and justice:—it matters not how absurd his productions may be, he will always find the pen of venality ready to aggrandize his fame. —Here I ventured to interrupt his harangue by observing, that I thought bestowing of praise upon performances, that were undeserving, only served to heighten their deformity by making them more conspicuous, as dressing a cripple in finery served but to render him the more remarkably ridiculous.— That observation will hold good," says my companion, "in almost every other human concern but that of public writing; for, in that particular province, where individuals, indeed, should be most tenacious of their reason, they are least so, and tamely resign their judgement, upon the literary essays of the times, to news-paper editors and reviewers of periodical publications; who, independent of the facility with which they are corrupted, are, in general, as little capable of discovering the beauties of a work (and very often much less so) as the herd of asses who listen to their determinations. 

By these sarcastic opinions, I naturally conjectured that my new friend had recently undergone the flagellations of criticism; but, as the asseverations of the author opened a new field of knowledge to my view, I resolved to cultivate his acquaintance with all the industry in my power. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

The poet and I resolve to dine together.— Poor encouragement for authors.—Dive for a dinner.—The poets refectory.— A proof of their antipathy to a certain profession.—Every mouth open, but none satisfied.—An unfortunate circumstance. —The comforts of a thick head. 

I OBSERVED a kind of ingenuous shame hang about the poet, which it was evident arose from a consciousness of his poverty; and it, doubtless, would have depressed him much more, if the lofty ideas I perceived he entertained of his own abilities, as an author, did not step in to his assistance, and counteract, by the ambition they suggested to his imagination, all the slights he might hourly receive, from the gross bulk of mankind, on the score of his wretchedness and want of money. 
As we walked through the park, in an inattentive moment I asked my companion where he proposed to dine that day; to which question he replied, with a significant look, that bore strongly the tokens of surprise. Afraid lest I had committed some gross impropriety, my cheeks reddened with a deep suffusion of scarlet, and I remained silent; when the poet, reading the state of my thoughts, relieved me from my embarrassment, by voluntarily informing me, that there was a house, not very far distant, at which he usually satisfied the craving demands of nature, unless he was engaged abroad, which, he observed, happened but seldom; and, if I were inclined to accompany him, that I should be exceedingly welcome to a share of his porridge.—"It is true," says he,  we poor fellows, who have the misfortune to labour under that most incurable of all diseases, the  cacoethes scribendi,  have seldom an opportunity of tasting those elegancies, whose delicious flavours render life so desirable to the animal part of humanity;—no," continued this miserable child of the Muses, "we are frequently obliged to walk over the thorny path of distress, and waste our existence in the vale of misery. 


Here he ended his remark with a deep-fetched sigh, at the same time clapping his hand, as it were by instinct, to his purse;—a combination of events that very plainly evinced the weakness of his finances; for, however poets may be elevated above the common classes of human nature in their ideas, I find the visitations of misery can make them melancholy as well as other men. 
In our way to the place of entertainment, the little author diverted me with various anecdotes of the persons, in whose company we might, in all probability, dine; and, if his penciling was to be depended upon, as conveying the outlines of truth, a most egregious set of beings they were. 

At last, after innumerable turnings and windings through by-streets and filthy alleys, I was given to understand, by my conductor, that we had come to the wished-for port; and I was looking with prodigious industry, but in vain, for a sight of some of those  insignia  of good living, which hung pendant from the windows of the house I had been introduced to the day before; and I began then to imagine that the poet was out in his reckoning, or, in plain English, had mistaken his way; when he removed my scruples by hailing me from a neighbouring cellar, into which he was descending with great precipitation, and had already got so far, that nothing but his head remained above the surface of the earth. 

I followed him into this subterranean cavern with infinite caution on my part, which was was very necessary to observe; for, though the poet, from long practice, could have run down them on a pressing occasion, yet a stranger must have found the descent to be no easy passage, as several of the stairs were wanting, and one false step might have been as detrimental to the safety of his person as it is generally found to the reputation of a fair lady: but, thanks to my prudence, I landed safe in this retreat of genius; for such it might be called from the characters of the persons who retired there to eat in security. 
The appearance of the place altogether was so unlike what I had ever seen before, that, had I been conveyed thither in a sleep, I should have had no doubts, on my awaking, of being an inhabitant of the other world.—All the light we were favoured with proceeded from the glimmering of two dirty lamps, which only served, as Milton has observed, to make darkness more visible; and, by the aid of which, I could just discern a table, at one end of the apartment, where the poet, taking me by the hand, introduced me as his particular friend, and a man of genius. 
Before the dinner was served up, a sort of general conversation took place, in the course of which a human figure, who sat at one corner of the table, (whom I took for an author, for he was still thinner, if possible, than my companion,) accosted my friend with "Well, Mr. Crambo, have you heard the melancholy news this morning?" — No," replies the diminutive poet, Lord bless me! what's that?" — Only your competitor Balderdash in limbo! — that's all," adds the other. —"I'm sorry for it," says my friend, shrugging his shoulders, "but 'tis what we must all come to."—"Aye, it was a damned unlucky accident for poor Frederic," cries another, "for he had been appointed, that very morning, editor to the Scandalous Chronicle."—"That was a damned stroke of fate, indeed," says a fourth; pray," continued he, "is it a fair question, Mr. Slang, to ask the sum he is nabbed for?"—"Oh! certainly," replies the other, "'tis thirteen pounds and upwards."—"Zounds! that's a sum indeed!" exclaims another, "but, perhaps, it could be settled;—as our friend is known to be seedy, the creditor might be persuaded to compound for half the debt on good security."—"No," rejoins another, "that's impossible; for his creditor is as inexorable as Dick Flint, the bailiff."—"Why, then, he hasn't the proper feelings of a man," cries my friend.—"Oh! damme, we know that," replies the other, "but the best of the joke is, he is not a man." —"Not a man!" exclaims the poet in amazement, "why, what the devil is he then?" — "Why, if you must know, he's a tailor," says the other.— Oh! damn the tailors," echoed instantly, and at the same moment, from every mouth in the cavern but mine; from which circumstance I naturally concluded there was a little antipathy existing between the two professions. 
The farther discussion of that subject was now postponed by a summons from the cook, who gave an additional edge to their appetites by the following polite exordium: — "Come, gemmen," says the lusty host,  get ready, for I shall soon be with you.—Damme, here's a dish fit for his majesty, God bless him. —You may say what you please, gemmen, about your Hellishogabalus, but I'll be curst if he ever sat down to soup like this.—Marrow and fat, my blades!—I have bought you the best meat in the market, and here it is, my masters, swimming in an ocean of soup, like a fleet at Spithead.— This will do your hearts good, my boys!—'tis no wishy-washy stuff, such as they give the MOUNSEERS, made up of cabbage and garlic;—no, no, I knows what's fitting for you, — you love the solid thing; and, for the matter of that, d'ye see, you do credit to it;—why, zounds! one of you authors will eat more in one meal than a French grenadier could in three, and much good may do you with it, say I.—Only understand me rightly, my masters, you must come down today, by Ch—t; for, damme, I can't stand it much longer if you go any more upon tick, d'ye see. 

At the end of this polite and persuasive harangue, he took up a large earthen dish, which smoked like a furnace or the tremendous crater of Mount Vesuvius, and, bending under it, came waddling towards the table; but, whether it was his over-eagerness to accommodate his half-famished guests, or that the heat of the dish burnt him so much that he could not hold it any longer, I will not take upon me to determine; but he certainly was too precipitate in the affair; for, not looking rightly before him, and the place being exceedingly dark, instead of placing the smoking viands immediately in the center of the table, he clapt it down with such violence on the scull of a tragic poet, who lay sleeping on the table, with his head resting on his hands, as split the dish into a hundred fragments, to the great annoyance of the whole society, who were terribly scalded by the soup, which was splashed around the table in copious streams, like the bursting of a water-spout, or the falls of Niagara. 

As for the lethargic servant of Melpomene, it was generally thought, that, so far from being able to honour any more of his friends, by writing dying speeches to immortalize their memory, he would behold the sweet face of the sun no more, or, in other language, that his scull was fractured past relief. But, in that conjecture, his brethren of the quill were fortunately deceived; for, when a neighbouring surgeon was sent for to examine the contusion, he gave them the satisfaction of knowing that their friend's wound was very inconsiderable; and likewise added, to their manifest comfort, that if a ton weight had fallen upon the poet's  cranium,  instead of an earthen dish, it would not have done his faculties the smallest injury, as nature had furnished him with a particular thickness of bone in that part, that absolutely bade defiance to accident for its demolition. 
As this unlucky affair had destroyed the hopes of the company, relative to the engagement of a hot dinner, they were obliged to call their philosophy to their assistance, (a lady to whom they were frequently obliged to be indebted in spite of their teeth,) and sit down to the miserable and cold remains of some ox-cheek and neck of beef, which they presently devoured with such speed as made me imagine, that a thousand such men in a country would cause a general famine. Indeed, as for my part, my wonder had been so much excited by the singular occurrences that took place in the cellar, that all my former ideas of eating gave way to my astonishment, and I thought as little of satisfying the cravings of my belly as an old maid on the eve of matrimony. 


CHAPTER XXXI. 

Crambo and I take a walk.—Agree to see a play.—A visit to a first-rate comedian.—He is jocular at the expence of the poet.—Strong doubts of Crambo's sanity of mind. 

AFTER discharging the reckoning in the cellar, my friend Crambo and I proposed taking a saunter into the fields; and, during our ramble, he asked me if I were willing to go to the play that evening. Upon my replying in the affirmative, and observing, that I could not indulge that propensity at present, on account of the expence, he bade me make myself easy on that particular, as he knew one of the principal comedians, for whom he constantly wrote puffs, and proposed that I should call upon him with a note, which, if he were at home, he said he would certainly honour; at the same time remarking, that he was sorry to give me so much trouble, but would have called himself on the actor, if he had not lodged, unfortunately, next door to a vile caitiff of a tailor, who had his name upon the debtor-side of his ledger for a greater sum than he found it convenient, or indeed even possible, to pay. 
Being naturally fond of such exhibitions, I greedily seized so favourable an opportunity of seeing a play on the London stage, imagining that to be the very fountain-head of dramatic excellence; and, going into the first public house we came to, the poet wrote a note, which he sealed up, and sent by me to the player, resolving to wait for my return at the alehouse, and solace himself with the comforts of a quid of tobacco, a pennyworth of porter, and a belly-full of reflexion. 
Rapt in idea with the pleasures which were to accrue from this commission, I hurried to the actor's house with all the haste imaginable, and, knocking at the door of his august mansion, it was opened by a servant, in rich livery, who appeared as much pampered with the good things of this world as an archbishop; but, before he would condescend to answer me the plain question, whether his master was at home or not, surveyed me from head to foot with a look of the most mortifying contempt, and then answered, with a supercilious smile,—                    Well, if he be, what the devil can you possibly want with him? —I was so provoked with the fellow's manner and incivility, that I had a great inclination to knock him down; but, repressing my choler as well as I could, told him, with some heat of resentment, that I came with a note from Mr. Crambo.—  What, Crambo, the poet?" says the fellow, with a sneer, "well, I'll take it in, but I'm cursedly afraid, my friend, that you'll go without your errand; for, to my knowledge, my master hasn't any cash to spare at present;— he has had a bad run at hazard lately, and been tricked most infernally; —he is left without a single guinea, and as poor as a minority-member:  then he walked leisurely up stairs, after bidding me wait in the hall till his return. 
From the observations of the impertinent footman, upon the state of his master's purse, I conjectured that my associate, Crambo, had applied to him, upon occasion, for other favours, infinitely more substantial, egad, than orders. 
After I had stood cooling my heels in the hall for above twenty minutes, the jackanapes in livery returned with a message from Mr. Buskin, his master, desiring me to walk up. I obeyed the mandate of the actor; and, following the footman up an elegant stair-case, I was shewn into a superb room, decorated with Titian's Loves of the Gods, and a couple of bawdy paintings, (which my friend Crambo assured me afterwards were the performance of a clergyman, and presented to the player as a mark of his particular esteem,) I found Mr. Buskin sitting at a table, like his redoubted highness the Great Mogul, demolishing a gallon of claret with two prostitutes of high  ton,  and a noted bailiff from Lincoln's-Inn, who had conscientiously lent him fifty guineas that morning, in hard specie, upon his simple bond and judgement, for a hundred, to be paid in six months, and the cash was displayed with great ostentation before him. — Turning to me with a contemptuous sneer, this consequential, self-swoln, comedian, inquired, in an authoritative tone of voice, if I was the person who brought the note from old Crambo. I answered, "Yes, sir," with a bow down to the very carpet; which, by the by, I might as well have spared myself the trouble of performing, as this haughty stage hero did not stoop from his dignity so much as to observe even the humility of so poor a being as myself.—"Well," says the actor, having read the note,  I don't know what to say to this business; this Crambo is a cursed troublesome sort of a fellow;— curse me," says the player, "but it would be an act of charity to confine him in a dark room, with clean straw, for a year or two."—"Who is he?  said one of the ladies.—"Who is he!" replied the king of shreds and patches, with a half-stifled laugh, "why, damme, he is an author, and more plague to me than a third-day ague;—the animal is continually levying contributions upon my purse, and, if I refuse him the supplies, I am sure to feel his sting the next day in some of the daily papers, where he incessantly scribbles, with as little regard to truth in his writing as he has to decency in his manners."—"Why d'ye indulge him in his beggarly requests?" rejoins the other lady.—"For the best reason in the world to an actor," cries the player, "because I'm afraid of him, you strap of Beelzebub; so I'm obliged to throw a sop to Cerberus now and then, to stop his growling; though, damme, I've often a great inclination to strangle the old dog, and get rid of him that way," continues the scenic chief, "by anticipating the conclusion of public justice." 
This joke, at the expence of my friend Crambo, set the table in a roar; but, on its subsiding, the tender limb of the law, who flanked the left side of the comedian, exclaimed vociferously,  B—st me, Master Buskin, why don't you do him over?—swear to any thing above ten pounds, and I'm your man;—by the Lord I'll muzzle the thief of the world in four and twenty hours;— say 'tis a match, and the thing's done, d'ye see me; so enough said.  But, whether the actor really held the philanthropic advice of his bosom-friend in abhorrence, or that he was afraid of the consequences, I cannot tell; yet certain it is, that he chose to turn a deaf ear to the charitable remonstrance of his companion at that period; and, calling for pen, ink, and paper, immediately wrote an order for two to the pit, which he delivered to me with as much majesty as if he had been in the act of personating the eighth Harry. 
As I had succeeded so well in my negotiation, I saluted the mimic hero with the greatest marks of respect, in the performance of which he was pleased to eye me with a kind of merry disdain; and, at last bursting forth into an immoderate fit of laughter, roared out,  Damme, what, I suppose you're a young poet too, an't you?  I instantly replied, "No, sir," with evident marks of confusion. — "Well, well," replied the mangler of heroics,  I ask your pardon most sincerely for the suspicion; I should have seen at first sight that you're too sleek and well dressed to drink the waters of Helicon, and, if you are not damnably dry indeed, my honest fellow," continues the actor, you never should: — take my word for it, 'tis a cursed dirty puddle, and, in some respects, may be compared to bad gin; for, though it frequently intoxicates the ragged part of my associates, may I be hissed the next time I immortalize Dionysius if it ever fattened a single scoundrel of them all. 

At the conclusion of this salutary admonition, one of the demireps politely observed, that she wondered Mr. Buskin should waste his time, talking about such shabby dogs. To which elegant observation the player thought proper to reply, that, though he admitted the rhyme-weaving rascals were contemptible as men, "yet," says the son of Melpomene,  they are to be dreaded as enemies, and, in some sort, are a kind of necessary appendage to the character of an actor, and answer much the same purpose to us as a candlestick does to a taper; for, though," continued Mr. Buskin, they haven't the power to increase our innate flame of merit, yet we find it damned difficult to stand upright without their assistance:—so, mind, my friend," says the player, turning to me, "give my respectful compliments to my worthy friend Mr. Crambo, and tell him not to forget me in the next critique he writes for the stage; for he knows that I both respect, admire, and regard, him," cries the insolent mummer, "as the devil does holy water,  turning his head to the bailiff, who sat in full enjoyment of the fun, with his tongue thrust in his left cheek, by the way of a tacit comment on the player's sincerity. — The actor, giving me a nod that seemed to say I might depart when I thought proper, I saluted the respectable group, and instantly left the house. 
On the way back to my companion, I could not avoid reflecting on the singular behaviour of the comedian:—first, on the long and tedious interval that I passed in his hall, which was an intolerable sacrifice, I understood afterwards, he made every poor devil pay to his vanity, whose quality, or supposed rank in life, did not elevate him sufficiently to be treated as his equal: — secondly, the wanton freedom and uncharitable impertinence with which he spoke of poor Crambo, who, from his education as well as his heart, could properly claim an infinite pre-eminence, over this upstart ranter of heroics, in the grand scale of society:—and, lastly, at the general contempt he threw upon authors, of all descriptions, by his illiberal remarks upon my dress and condition; when he should have retreated within his own mind, and been thankful to Fortune for his situation, which lifted him above the experience of those calamities that are hourly endured by men of the most sublime merit, virtue, and sensibility, and whose caprice of disposition could not be better, or more strongly, evinced, than by her ridiculous dispensations in favour of so worthless an individual. 
When I came to the rendezvous, I found my friend Crambo sitting with his pot before him, writing with a pencil in a book, which I learned afterwards he carried about with him, to enter such thoughts as arose in his imagination, and which he imagined worth a record. As I perceived that he was deeply immerged in thought, I was resolved not to disturb his ideas, but to remain where I was until he should be disengaged, and descend, like another mortal, to interest himself in the affairs of this sublunary world. 
During this interval, the woman of the house came out of the bar, and desired me to take my companion away as fast as possible, for she did not choose to harbour madmen in her house. When I testified my surprize at this strange account of my friend's intellects, she told me, that, since I left him, he had started from his seat, and, running about the room with a book in his hand, made such a noise, and uttered such unintelligible jargon, as frightened two fish-women and a ticket-porter, who were drinking brandy in the same box. And she farther informed me, that she had sent to a mad doctor's, who lived within a few doors, for a straight waistcoat, to confine him, but, unfortunately, the physician had left home about an hour before, on a visit to a celebrated lady, who had gone out of her mind on the death of a favourite lap-dog.— Here I thought proper to remove the poor woman's apprehensions by informing her, that Mr. Crambo was a poet, and that what she took for incoherent ravings, was probably only the recital of some passages of a new poem which he had been conceiving;—that I would answer for it he was a very harmless character, and intreated her to let him remain unmolested for a few minutes longer, as perhaps disturbing him then might unhinge the best chain of ideas that were ever forged in the human understanding, and stop his progress in the very moment that he was galloping on his sublime Pegasus to the heights of immortality. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

Discover Crambo in a poetical reverie.— Go to the play.—My friend and I meet with a disaster.—The applause of an audience not always consonant with reason.—More ways than one of acquiring fame.—The poet's remarks on the present state of the theatres.—He disputes with a critic, and shews his contempt of modern actors.—My wishes are constrained to be obedient to necessity. 

PRESENTLY I observed that the poet's eyes began to glisten; and, my landlady conjuring me to step on one side for the love of God, I followed her advice, being willing to see what turn this affair would take: but my friend Crambo did not leave me long in doubt; for, grasping the pewter pot in one hand, and his common-place book in the other, he strutted about the room, repeating the following lines from Dryden with great energy:

"Happy's the man, and happy he alone, 
"He who can call to-day his own; 
"He who, secure within himself, can say, 
"To-morrow do thy worst, for I have liv'd to-day; 
"Be fair or foul, or rain or shine, 
"The joys I have possess'd in spite of fate are mine; 
"Not heav'n itself upon the past has pow'r, 
"But what has been, has been, and I have had my hour." 

At the conclusion of this elegant quotation, the little bard stalked across the room with the port of an emperor; when, running up to him, I took my friend by the hand, and informed him of the success of my embassy, taking care to conceal the disagreeable expressions which the player had made use of so much to Crambo's disadvantage. 
As the clock struck five, my companion put me in mind that it was time we went to the theatre, if I wished to have a good seat, as the piece to be performed that evening was a very attractive dish to the public, and considered by the million as possessing merit, though, for his part, he thought otherwise. 
Having paid the landlady, who seemed more than commonly rejoiced at my friend's departure, we hurried to the scene of action, and got there just time enough to squeeze in with the croud, who had been waiting for the doors opening. The pressure, on all sides of me, was so great, that I had not the power to make use of my hands, but was carried forward by the mob, intirely at their disposal, like an unnavigated boat in a strong current, and, by the time I had got into the pit, I was almost reduced to the consistence of a jelly. As for the little poet, he had been more scurvily used than myself; for, added to the embraces his ribs had undergone, the outrageous behaviour of the multitude who surrounded him had fairly carried away his hat and wig, and he was obliged to sit with his handkerchief tied round his head for the rest of the evening. An orange-woman accosting me to buy some fruit, I attempted to put my hand in my pocket, when, alas! I found they were turned inside out, and I was robbed of every shilling that my rigid oeconomy had preserved out of my last guinea. I communicated this doleful piece of news to my neighbour Crambo, who, after shrugging his shoulders a little, and pointing to the loss of his own hat and wig, bade me be comforted.—"You see," cries the poet,  how that vixen, Fortune, delights in persecuting us poor devils, and it matters not a whit, if she means to plague the human heart, whether she effects her vile purposes by the loss of a purse or the demolition of an empire; so, my friend," contitinued the bard, "e'en let us assume that equality of temper which makes its possessor easy under every difficulty, and defeat the malice of the gipsy's intentions, by shewing, in our conduct, that we despise her and all her works:—the motto of my existence has been always  nil desperandum,  which, let me tell you, is the best charm we can make use of to extirpate the presence of care. 

Notwithstanding this well-timed address of the poet, I could not chace away, for the soul of me, the sorrow that I felt for the loss of my money; I was then almost dead with fatigue and want of rest;—the miseries that I had endured the night before were still warm in my imagination, and the uncertainty of knowing whether I should, or should not, have the felicity of paying a salutary visit to Morpheus, on that night, loaded my heart with the most inexpressible anxiety. But these fears were presently removed by the kindness of the philanthropic author, who generously offered me the use of one half of his bed, until Fate should enable me to procure one of my own. 
Our conversation was now interrupted by the ringing of a bell behind the curtain, which I understood was a signal that the performance was going to begin. When I saw the people sit down around me, in preparation, my heart beat high with expectation of the coming pleasure, and, at length, the moment of gratification arrived. The curtain was drawn up, and a young man, of a genteel aspect, stepped forward to speak the prologue. As I understood that he was a dramatic novitiate, that had lately made his appearance with particular honour to himself and advantage to the manager, I listened, with the greatest attention, to his manner of delivery and to the language of the composition, expecting to see and hear something, if not immediately perfection, at least very near approaching to it. But, in this as well as many other instances of my life, I was most cruelly deceived. As for the language of the composition, (notwithstanding I was assured, by the persons around me, that it was written by a man of fashion,) I was convinced it was the most absurd combination of nonsense that ever disgraced the dramatic exhibition of a barn; and, as for the actor who spoke it, he put me in mind of the Merry-Andrew to an itinerant  charlatan,  by his gestures, rather than a first-rate comedian, who might be presumed to have some latent regard for common sense, when strutting away his ridiculous hour on the boards of so respectable a theatre; for he skipped and jumped about the stage like a mad dancing-master in one of the wards of Bedlam-Hospital. 
When the disgusting business of prologue-speaking was over, the comedian retired; but, instead of being attended, in his theatric exit, by those murmurs of disapprobation, which I conceived must have always followed so vile a martyrdom of propriety, he was loudly applauded by several people from the pit and galleries. This extraordinary conduct in an audience, that I naturally supposed enlightened, from the opportunity they had of contrasting real merit with buffoonery, surprised me so much, that I asked Crambo what he thought of their procedure. He smiled at my question, and told me a secret, well worth knowing to all frequenters of theatres, namely, that the plaudits I had so judiciously condemned were bestowed by the dependents and hired auxiliaries of the player in question, to some of whom he gave orders for admission, and to others money, to support him in his earnest and laudable endeavours to acquire a great reputation as an actor, at the expence of every thing rational or praise-worthy.— As for the judgement, or reason, that is supposed to predominate in a playhouse," says the poet, I would not give three farthings for their influence; besides, I dare aver, that the small portions there may be of either, among the audience of this evening, is confined to a few individuals, who are too proud to enter into a contest with ignorance, and too well bred to be violent in their displeasure; so that, unfortunately for common sense," continues the bard, "folly and presumption defeat her and all her influence, within these walls, in nine instances out of ten. 

As the little man got heated, in his remarks upon the prostitution of public praise, he spoke so loud that he was overheard by several people around us; some of whom thought his observations very pertinent, and were so well pleased at the grace and facility with which he delivered them, that they paid him a particular attention during the rest of the entertainment; so much had the beauties of his understanding overcome the prejudice that was at first conceived against him from his grotesque and singular appearance. 

At length the play began, and I kept a watchful eye, first on the performers and then on the poet, being willing to perceive, by the emotions of his countenance, (which, from his black eyes, heavy brows, and meagre muscles, was finely calculated for expression,) how far his feelings corresponded with my own. One of the most celebrated of the actresses making her appearance, such a clapping of hands ensued as could not have been exceeded if Thalia herself had personated the character; all which she received with a kind of indifferent insolence of behaviour, as tacitly implied, that she imagined it was doing them a prodigious favour by deigning to appear at all; but, entering into the business of the scene, she conducted her dialogue with such a smartness of delivery as seemed to give general delight; and, at one or two passages, where the poet had arisen a small degree above his usual dulness, she got through so well, and did the author such justice, by adding to his wit a certain poignancy peculiar to herself, that I observed the muscles of the grim bard (who was leaning his chin most attentively upon an oaken stick) relaxing with a lazy tendency towards a smile of approbation. I was the more pleased that my friend's iron features were expanded at this happy essay of the actress, as her management of the execution had made me extremely well pleased. 
At the conclusion of the comedy, I heard the bard utter a loud groan, which was an ample testimony to me that he had not been amused equal to his wishes; and he was sitting in a kind of sullen discontent, when a gentleman observed, that he had never seen a more excellent comedy, nor one better performed. This public asseveration was, in the opinion of the poet, too great an insult to the taste of the audience to pass unnoticed; and, rising accordingly from his seat, with the importance of a Cicero, he challenged the person, who had passed such an eulogium on the performance and performers, to point out where those beauties lay, in the construction of the piece or the merit of the players, that he had so warmly attributed to both. 
My friend had scarcely thrown the gauntlet of defiance, when a circle was formed, of every one within hearing, to listen to the criticisms of the author, his former remarks having excited their attention. Upon my friend's opponent making a few loose and desultory attempts to defend his assertion, the little retainer of the muses answered him in the following manner.—"The science of acting," said the bard, "is a more difficult undertaking than is generally imagined by the actors themselves, or by those weak persons who arrogate a sufficient share of judgement to determine on its excellences, when, in reality, they have frequently no requisite to make them competent to such a situation but their presumption, and no ally to support so gross an usurpation of knowledge but their impudence. Many young people, impelled by a bastard kind of ambition," continued the slave of Parnassus, "rush upon the stage, foolishly imagining themselves under the guidance of the muses, and prosecute their intentions with as much industry and zeal as those hoodwinked wretches, who, from a supposed call of the Spirit, run about the confines of these nations, propagating religious bigotry at the expence of human happiness; yet they are both too often mistaken in the cause, and, in general, made miserable by the effect;—but this is a free country," exclaimed the son of Apollo, with a significant sneer, "and we have, thank heaven, a privilege to be ridiculous whenever we think proper."— 
Here the bard's adversary stopped the progress of his raillery by asking him, if he did not admit that the present actors, taken in general, were equal to those he remembered when some years younger; to which question my friend replied, "No," with a strong emphasis, and supported his negative by the ensuing remarks.— The modern players," said the poet, "are governed by a momentary caprice, and sacrifice the little understanding they have to please the vitiated palate of the public, without the least concern at the outrages they are doing to nature, or the unpleasantness of a labour where their reason and their efforts must be continually at variance. The actors of the old school, on the contrary, nobly stepped forward in the defence of insulted wisdom, and rescued the stage from that barbarity, into which it had been gradually sinking before for at least half a century: and their exertions did them immortal honour; for they dared to oppose their judgements, as men, against the ruinous prejudices which a false taste had implanted in the hearts of their benefactors. At the head of this reformation stood the late inimitable  Garrick, " vociferated Crambo, "who united as many qualifications for an actor in his mind as the Almighty will perhaps admit a human being to possess; and the want of which all men of discernment must lament in his successors, who are seldom correct, but frequently intolerable.—And who can expect otherwise," said the poet, from men who have not a common knowledge of punctuation, or the absolute necessity that the gesture, voice, and eye, of the performer should intimately correspond in the execution, or that the smallest deficiency, in the conduct of either, renders the representation imperfect, in the same degree as the want of the most inconsiderable feature in the human body will not only take off from the beauty of the whole, but, in some cases, make it even repulsive and disgusting? 

By this time the usual summons was given for the commencement of a farce that was to succeed the comedy, written by the favourite author of the day, which the bard no sooner heard, than, taking me by the arm, he forced me out of the theatre, asserting, that he would rather attend a puppet-show at Bartholomew-Fair than the performance of a modern farce, especially a dramatic abortion, squeezed from the brain of an animal, who had scarcely knowledge sufficient to declare whether a human being was a substantive or a preposition; "for," continued the inspired Crambo,  I have it in my power to apologise for the laughable blunders of the one, but cannot for the monstrous absurdities of the other;  upon which he dragged me by main force out of the pit, though I was repeatedly assured, that a great comedian was to support the principal character in the after-piece. 




CHAPTER XXXIII.  


Arrive at the poet's lodgings.—An argument that sometimes proves the pleasure of living in a garret.—An accident occurs which terminates in a tragical manner.—A convincing proof, that fatigue is a better opiate than laudanum. —A hasty sketch of the furniture of an author's study. 

MY friend Crambo not being in a condition to go into a house of entertainment, we scudded as fast as possible to his lodgings, where we cast anchor a little before ten o'clock. They were situated at the bottom of an alley, in St. Giles's, so narrow, that it would not admit two people to walk a-breast, and so long, that I thought we never should come to the bottom; for there the bard had chosen his residence, in the garret of a building that had once been a house, and whose attic story leaned for support against the mansions on the opposite side of the alley. He made innumerable apologies to me, as we ascended to his apartment, for taking me so high, and told me, that his predilection in favour of a garret intirely arose from its being more detached from the world than any other room in the house, besides the great advantages it afforded to a mind devoted to study and contemplation. 
As we had no candle, and the poet was extremely drowsy as well as myself, we agreed to go to bed by moon-light; but, alas! I found, to my cost, when I had laid myself down with an intention to sleep, that very few persons had reason to envy my friend Crambo the possession of his couch; for the feathers it contained were so scanty that my bones rubbed against the frame of the bed; nor were they quite so soft in their quality as eider-down; for, a few having made their way through the ticking, they annoyed my poor carcass worse than so many crow-quills. However, I knew that my circumstances obliged me to make a virtue of necessity; so, putting the best face I could upon the matter, I was preparing to resign myself to the arms of Morpheus, whom I secretly implored to shed his poppy over my brow, when an accident happened that removed all ideas of sleep for some time. This was occasioned by the retainer of the muses himself, who, in groping his way to the bed, stumbled over some bricks, which he had artfully placed for its support at the foot, and which, falling down, not only destroyed the whole oeconomy of the poet's contrivance, but made such a confounded noise as alarmed an old woman, who slept in the floor beneath, and whose profession, I afterwards found, was that of a fortune-teller, a secret she had picked up in the neighbourhood of Norwood, and, by following which, she made more in a week than my friend Crambo did, by writing poetry, in a month. 
The accident had not happened above five minutes, when the old sybil made shift to crawl up to the poet's door, and bestowed such a volley of curses upon him as made my hair stand on end; and, among the rest of her predictions, she declared, without any ceremony, that Crambo would most assuredly come to be hanged. But the little bard was so exasperated at the tenor of the last assertion, that ▪  collecting all the strength he was master of, he ran full-but with his head against the stomach of the prophetess; but, using more force in the business than was necessary, and she, at the same time, fastening her claws an inch deep in his throat, they tumbled together down a perpendicular height of at least twenty feet, where they continued to fight on their arrival with prodigious ferocity, like two contending cats, till they were parted by some people who lodged in the same house, and came out to their assistance. 

However, in a few minutes after the affray, the poet returned to his apartment, groaning and sobbing with the pain it had occasioned; but, undressing himself, he at last came to bed also, uttering incoherent ejaculations to the supreme Being, not to procure a sweet slumber, but to punish the wretch who had been the primary cause of his bodily torture. 
Yet, in spite of every disadvantage, I made shift to sleep tolerably sound, until the bright beams of the sun had awakened my companion, who, shaking me violently by the shoulder, broke the fetters of my repose, to inform me, that it was time he should get up and procure another hat and wig, which he wished to do as early as possible, that his deficiency, in that particular, might not be seen by the neighbourhood, which, he assured me, was not the least scandalous within the bills of mortality; and, if I were willing to accompany him on that occasion, he should be very glad; but if, on the contrary, I was too much fatigued, he would leave me to my slumbers, and return in half an hour. 
When I rubbed my eyes sufficiently to survey the apartment of poor Crambo, I must own I felt so little inclination to be left behind, being struck with amazement at the wretchedness of his retreat, that I immediately told him I should be extremely happy to take a walk in so fine a morning.—"Well," says the bard,  if that's your resolution, I will step down stairs, while you are dressing yourself, and get something applied to my forehead, which is extremely painful, and be with you directly.  — And, indeed, he had ample occasion for a plaster; for the disaster of the preceding night with the old woman had been attended with some very ugly effects; among the rest, a great lump upon his forehead, about the bigness of a turkey's egg, was not the most insignificant. 
When the bard had left the room, I took an accurate survey of the furniture of his garret, which consisted of the miserable  succedaneum  for a bed, on which, though it appeared next to an impossibility that any one could close their eyes for half an hour, I found, from recent experience, that even Misery could drown his feelings, in the soft bands of sleep, even on a couch of stone. There was likewise a square deal table, with three legs remaining out of four, which it appeared the cabinet-maker had formerly thought necessary for its support, on which were some writings. Among the rest I discovered three cantos of a poem on the inefficacy of wealth towards constituting human happiness, and a satirical epistle to a justice of the peace, who, I understood afterwards, had dealt with such a degree of severity towards the poet, as the latter had thought sufficient provocation to draw upon the head of the devoted magistrate the bitterness of his redoubted pen. — There was, moreover, a rebus for a magazine, a list of bloody murders for one of the morning-papers, and some loose paragraphs; in one of which a man was to have his jaw twisted, in the act of taking some blasphemous oaths in Covent-Garden; — another was an outrageous puff for a tragic actress, who was to appear at one of the theatres in the course of the ensuing week, setting forth, that she was the great granddaughter of a general-officer, and supported an aged mother and three sisters by plain-work;—the third was an account of a bankruptcy that was to take place in a great house at Philadelphia;— and the fourth a particular relation of the plague, and its consequences, that was to break out at Grand Cairo in the beginning of the following month, with a full account of the lethargy that was to seize the Prussian monarch at Berlin, when the emperor was on a visit to the Austrian Netherlands. 

I probably should have discovered some valuable manuscripts in my researches, had I not been disturbed in the pursuit by hearing the poet coming hastily up the ladder which led to his room; upon which I replaced every thing in proper order, and set myself down in a chair without a back, which, by the by, was the only one in the room, and was very industriously reading a dying speech, that was pasted against the wall, accompanied by a bawdy ballad and John the Painter's effigy, when the servant of the Parnassian family entered his sublime apartment, and told me he was ready to attend me. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

Disadvantages of living in a dirty neighbourhood.—The poet dips for a wig.— Pays a visit to a bookseller.—A morning's lounge in Westminster-Abbey. — Meet with an original. — A summary discourse on the prostitution of epitaphs. —A man of an excellent understanding soured by misfortunes. 

BY the time my friend Crambo and I had got out of the alley, we were both almost out of breath, not with the distance of ground we had walked over, but with the alertness we were forced to make use of to avoid some unsavoury salutes from the windows as we passed; for, by the number of offerings which the chaste nymphs of that district discharged from their apartments, one would naturally conclude, that sacrificing to Cloacina was the principal amusement of their existence. 
At last I found myself in the middle of a court, which was occupied by dealers in almost every article of dress, such as clothes, boots, shoes, and, in short, every appurtenance necessary to the completion of a fine gentleman; and, at length, we arrived at a wig-warehouse, the windows of which were faced with shambles, and ornamented with wigs for all ages, sexes, and complexions; which the bard no sooner saw than he entered, beckoning me to follow him. The master of the shop, perceiving the nature of his visit, inquired, with much complaisance, if he wanted a tie-wig, a jasy, a bob, or a major; to which the poet immediately replied, "A tie-wig." — Will your honour make a choice or take a dip?  says the merchant.— "Oh! a dip by all means," replies the bard.— Why, then, come into the back-shop, master," says the other, "and I'll fit you for sixpence as well as any gemman in the land.  We both followed his directions; and, going into a little back room, he produced a canvass bag, at the same time informing us, that it contained caxens of such delicate workmanship as would not disgrace the forehead of a chief magistrate. 
When the poet had deposited his sixpence, he stripped off his coat; and, the master of the shop having opened the mouth of the repository, the little bard put down his arm as far as he could reach, and, after groping about for some minutes, pulled out an old brown wig, without powder, which, from its complexion and disorder, seemed to me as if it had been in the hands of a japanner of shoes, and literally not worth two-pence. But the shopkeeper, it appeared, thought otherwise; for, taking it from the hands of the poet, he told him, with exultation, that he was in luck, for he had brought out a wig for sixpence which was honestly worth a crown between man and man, and, placing it alertly on a block, began to comb it; and indeed the ingenious wig-retailer brought it, by dint of industry, into so respectable a form, that I could not help congratulating my friend Crambo upon the additional graces it gave his countenance. 

The next concern being to procure a decent hat, and my companion not being over nice in respect to the fashion, he got one in a neighbouring shop upon very moderate terms; and, being now equipped with the habiliments of a gentleman, he took leave of me, having first exacted my promise to dine with him, at the ordinary in the cellar, at the usual hour; after which he set off for Pater-noster Row, on a visit to a bookseller, with whom, I understood, he had articled himself, under a heavy penalty, to furnish a history of the last war for the moderate premium of half-a-crown a sheet. 
Feeling myself in an aukward situation, destitute of a penny to buy the necessaries of life, and deprived of the society of the ingenious author, whose singularities of disposition in a great measure tended to divert my own chagrin, I resolved to pay a visit to Westminster-Abbey, and endeavour, by discoursing with the tombs of departed statesmen and heroes, to reconcile myself to those wants and inconveniences which oppressed me, by learning, from their posthumous declarations, how soon they would be no more. When I entered the abby, I felt an awful sensation pervade my whole frame; the Gothic magnificence of the pile at once pleased and surprised me; I fancied myself walking over the ashes of the good and great, whose names have shone so conspicuous in the page of history; and trod with a kind of sacred apprehension along the sculptured pavement, lest the levity of my actions should give offence to the ennobled dust that slept around me. 
I was reading, with particular delight, the epitaphs on the tombs of the British poets, when a man of a genteel mein, but shabbily accoutred, and apparently in greater misery than myself, accosted me, and requested, in terms of the utmost politeness, that I would assist him in the translation of a Latin epitaph in the corner, and at the same instant informed me, that his curiosity was strongly excited to know if our forefathers were as ridiculous in their monumental inscriptions as ourselves, and as willing to honour the memory of a wealthy scoundrel as the present generation. The oddity of the remark, and the solicitude of the man, conspired to awaken my desire to know who he was; which I presently effected by asking him the following question: "Pray, sir," replied I,  do not you imagine, that the custom, all enlightened nations have adopted, of paying a proper tribute to the merits of the dead, is not only laudable in itself, as an exercise of the principle of gratitude for the services they have rendered us, but eventually of benefit to the living, inasmuch as it holds forth to their embraces a certain desirable reward, after death, for the maintenance of virtue and propagation of knowledge while they remained members of human society?" "Your idea of rewarding men of merit is erected upon a very noble foundation," says the stranger; "and, if these rewards were confined merely to persons of that denomination, I should have no possible dislike to their continuance; but as, on the contrary, like splendid titles and other human honours, they are lavished with as much, or more, profuseness on the unprincipled knave, who dies amidst the execrations of his fellow-creatures, as on the scholar who has ornamented his country by his labours, or the soldier who has defended it by his valour, I think they must be considered, by all men who judge properly, as a living satire upon our vanity, and not a lasting record of either our virtues or our wisdom.  I told him, in reply, that, if the abuses really existed which he had pointed out, I though that every man might retire to the grave, contented with having done his duty, and be totally indifferent whether a tomb was raised, to tell the world he had existed, or not; and that, however false praise might be lavished, or rather prostituted, on a bad man, it by no means tended to diminish the virtues of a good one; and, though, in some few instances, the practice might be liable to ridicule, yet, taken all together, the spirit of commemorating the actions of the deceased was not only praise-worthy, but, in my humble opinion, strictly proper. 
On the conclusion of my reply, the stranger said,  I will pursue the subject no farther, as I find I am not likely to make you my proselyte very readily. You are but a young man, and have a much better opinion of mankind, I am afraid, than they deserve; but, when you have lived as long in the world as I have, you will perceive its vices and its follies, and most cordially despise them.  I told my new acquaintance, that I was very sorry every day's experience but too fully proved the justice of his remarks upon the depravity of our species; — "and, though a very young man," continued I, "I have discovered more vices, in the small circle of persons with whom I have been connected, than I before imagined to have existed in the whole world." "Oh ho! then," replies the misanthropical stranger, evidently pleased at my condemnation of modern manners, "you have bit at the bridle, you have found some difference between their professions and their actions, have you?" "Indeed I have, most woefully," rejoined I. "I am glad of it," says the stranger; "give me your hand; the more unpalatable the draught of life is in the beginning, the sweeter it will become at the conclusion; and take the word of a soldier, young man, when he avers, that you will be the better for it as long as you exist. Had I," continued the stranger, "felt the rod of adversity in my youth, I should not have been left destitute of the blessings of life at a period of my existence when I most require them." 
His last expression touched me to the soul by the manner in which he delivered it. I sympathised with his misfortunes, and begged to know if I could serve him, before that I recollected I had not even the power to assist myself. However, he took my offer in my good part, and, perceiving my sensibility, told me, as we walked through the ailes of the abbey, the principal circumstances that had brought him to regard the world and its dependences with so inveterate an antipathy. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

The history of Captain Blisset. 

I AM apprehensive, my young friend," (said the stranger,) that you will find nothing sufficiently entertaining in my history to repay you for the trouble of listening to a chain of occurrences that have made up the principal part of my being, and which are tinctured with an infinitely greater proportion of sorrow than of joy. However, as it appears to be your wish to hear it, I will be as brief as possible. 
I am descended from a reputable family in the north of Ireland. My name is Blisset; and my father was one of those people who are distinguished, in that kingdom, by the name of gentlemen-farmers; besides the profit that arose from a large portion of land which he rented from a neighbouring nobleman, he had a small fortune that was left him by a distant relation. On the joint issue of these he contrived to live in a state of comfort, enjoying all the diversions of the country, such as hunting, fishing, and all those amusements which are annexed to the life of a country gentleman. But, being one evening at a rural ball, he danced with a beautiful lady, whose natural graces made such an impression on his heart, that he could not quit the room without inquiring into her name and circumstances; and the account he received was far from adding fuel to his growing love; for he learned, that she was the only daughter of a gentleman of considerable property in the adjoining county, and who intended her as a wife for a young baronet of large estate, who was hourly expected to return home from the continent, where he had been for some time for the improvement of his education. 
Though this account considerably diminished my father's hopes, it by no means removed the flame that still continued to rage within his bosom.— At last he contrived to have an interview with my mother, (for so the lady proved in the consequences, to my misfortune;) and they became so perfectly agreeable to each other, that a private marriage was resolved on, to put it out of the power of even Fate itself to divide their love.— She took an opportunity, when her father was gone to town upon business of the most serious importance, to convey the principal part of her clothes and baggage to her lover's house, who met her, in her father's park, with a trusty servant and a carriage, into which they both got, and drove with all expedition until they arrived at the farm, where a clergyman attended to unite them in the indissoluble bonds of matrimony. 
When her father returned to the country, and found how his daughter had disposed of herself in wedlock without his knowledge, he grew frantic with the disappointment; but strove to forget her want of duty, and herself, by going to reside in France, where he survived the event but a few years, and left all the property he was able in large bequests to his friends and acquaintance, and the rest so laden with mortgages and other disagreeable incumbrances, that my father was half ruined in the endeavours to recover the remainder.— However, in spite of these draw-backs on their felicity, they contrived to live very comfortably, my mother bearing him a child every year; and the first fruit of their love was your humble servant. 
The circumstance of my being a boy so pleased them both, that my parents continued to caress me with the most extravagant tokens of parental fondness, a mode of behaviour which they pursued till I left my country and saw them no more. As I grew up in strength and beauty, I was indulged in every wanton and improper propensity, at the expence of my brothers and sisters. This partiality in my favour was so glaring to every person that visited the family, that some, who were on the most intimate footing with my father and mother, strove to remove, or at least to reduce, a partiality which existed in preference to the rest of the children, who were, in general, more amiable in the eyes of strangers; for, the unlimited manner in which I experienced their ill-timed kindnesses had worked me up to such a pitch of arrogance and ill-nature, that my humour became intolerable to all those whose senses were not hood-winked by the unaccountable partiality of a parent; and various were the methods practised by the servants to mortify young master Frank, (for that is my name,) while my brothers and sisters were treated with kindness by every one but their parents: some would take an opportunity, while they were putting on my clothes, to run a pin into my arm, as if by accident, and others would give me a sly pinch, which made me roar for an hour. You may be sure I did not fail to make the most of these abuses to my parents; but, at last, my complaints became so frequent and so numerous, that they lost their credit; and, in the sequel, I was pinched and pushed about by all the servants in the house, out of the sight of my parents, without even the satisfaction of having my accounts believed. In this manner was the earlier part of my life passed, till I arrived at nine years of age, when it was thought proper to send me to an academy in the same county; but I had not been long there before the same spirit broke out which had rendered me so intolerable at home. But now the scene was changed; for my humours were counteracted with a studious particularity, and my faults punished by such severe applications of the birch to my ill-fated posteriors, that I could not sit down, for whole days succeeding the punishment. At length, a full, true, and particular, account reached the ears of my parents, who instantly flew to the school, and charged the master, on pain of their displeasure, not to whip me any more, but strive to make me learn my task by persuasion, which they assured him was a sufficient incitement to make a boy do his duty of so gentle and governable a disposition as mine. 
Leaving the master of the seminary under that ridiculous restriction, they returned home; and it was not long before I resorted to my old tricks; which the master, endeavouring to curb by the methods prescribed by the wise authors of my being, and finding them ineffectual, very fairly took the resolution of sending me back to profit by their sage instructions; or, in other words, turned me out of the school as an incorrigible young puppy, who was destined to ruin, by possessing a perverse disposition, which he was forbidden to regulate or alter by the silly determination of two weak people, who rather chose that their offspring should shoot up to manhood, detested by every one but themselves, than grow amiable, dutiful, and exemplary, at the expence of a sore breech and a few salutary tears. 
At my return home, my parents were filled with the most implacable resentment against the school-master, whom they honoured with the terms of insolent pedagogue, hard-hearted tyrant, and other phrases equally expressive of their folly and malignity; but, at the same time, took a firm resolution that their dear Frank should not be exposed to such merciless cruelty for the future, which they were well assured I had not deserved, because, forsooth, I had told them to the contrary; and, in consequence, I was permitted to pass my time, until I approached a state of manhood, without receiving those advantages of education which other young people enjoyed, for fear that discipline should break my heart and too much study impair my constitution. But, one day, after dinner, as the family were sitting in conversation, my mother told a story of a circumstance in which I was materially concerned; but her manner of relating it displeased me so much, that, when she came to a particular part of the narrative, I very coolly gave her the lie direct; and, upon her offering to remonstrate with me upon the impropriety of my behaviour, I immediately spit in her face. But this last was an outrage that not even their partiality could overlook; I was threatened by my father with personal chastisement, which I defied him to put in execution; and, at length, things grew to such a height of animosity, that it was determined to purchase me a commission in the army, in one of the regiments ordered abroad, for we were then at war. Accordingly the whole business was immediately put  en train,  and I was consigned to the care of a near relation of my father, in town, who was to provide every requisite necessary for such an undertaking, and to give me such advice as would prove beneficial to me in my conduct as an officer, he having retired from the army but a few years, and in which he had served with an unsullied reputation ever since he was the height of a regimental drum. 
Agreeable to the desire of my parents, the sage veteran formed such rules for my conduct, as he thought, from experience, would prove most serviceable; but, in general, I turned such a deaf ear to his instructions as disgusted the old gentleman exceedingly; and, after executing his commission with fidelity, he gave me up to Fortune, as a perverse young man who would one day bleed severely under the rod of her displeasure. 
The morning before I took my leave of this worthy man, he seized me by the hand, and, pressing it between his with a warmth which nothing but true friendship could inspire, spoke to me, with the most engaging complacency, in nearly the following manner: — 'My dear Frank,' said the old gentleman, 'before you quit me intirely, I must intreat your particular attention to the advice I am now going to give you. Do not shrink from it, my dear boy: it is not the severe admonition of an old man, who looks with a jaundiced eye upon mankind; it is the essence of all the knowledge I have gleaned in a long course of service, during which I have endeavoured not only to live in, but with, the world; and I have learned, from a knowledge of my own weakness, to look with an eye of charity upon all the frailties incident to our nature. I know the passions of youth are difficult to be restrained within the circle of prudence; but I have likewise discovered, my dear child, that, the more they are restricted, the happier it is for ourselves. As a soldier, you should make your passions observe the same degree of subordination to your reason as the duties of your profession will teach you to observe to your commanding officer: let each have its proper influence in the general system, but suffer none to be licentious. Your own good sense will, I hope, inform you, that you have now entered into a profession whose basis is virtue and honour; and that the utmost circumspection of behaviour is necessary on your part to preserve the character you have assumed from violation. You are now a soldier, Frank,' said the old gentleman with a particular strength of emphasis; 'and you must reflect, that you are going to join an army, of which you must consider yourself an active part, whose purpose is to crush the ambitious spirit of a perfidious enemy, and furnish another action of British glory to be recorded for ever in the archives of immortal Fame. There is,' continued the grey-headed veteran, 'an absolute necessity for every man, who wishes to be respected, to observe a proper degree of civility towards all ranks of people; and that mode of behaviour is particularly requisite in an officer. It should be your constant study to deserve the commendations of your general, by strictly adhering to your duty; to court the good will of your brother-officers by your complaisance; and to insure the blessings of your inferiors by acts of kindness, rectitude, and humanity: and take my word, that the pleasures you will experience, by following this line of conduct, will amply repay you for the trouble of putting it in practice; for, besides the advantage of establishing your own content, it is the best possible method of aggrandising your fortune. To enforce this observation more strongly, I will tell you an anecdote of two persons whom I knew well, and the consequences of whose lives prove the necessity of paying a proper deference to the opinion of others. — There were two friends, William and Frederic, who were educated together at the same university; the former possessed a sweet and gentle disposition, the latter a strong understanding; and, both happening to be under the care of the same guardian, (for they were orphans,) they followed one course of study, and were intended for one profession. When they arrived at man's estate, it was thought expedient, as they had some very important connections in America, to send them over there to settle as merchants. Accordingly they went to one of the principal colonies, which was then subject to the British legislature, and carried over some strong letters of recommendation to the principal people, but particularly the governor. On their arrival on the continent, they received every token of respect and friendship from the people; but, Frederic's temper being discovered to be as bad and unaccommodating as William's was good and polite, the latter naturally attracted the hearts of his acquaintance, while the former was treated with a coldness bordering on incivility, which soured him to such a degree, that he at last became intolerable even to his old companion and colleague, William; and it was determined at length, for the mutual happiness of both parties, to break up the partnership and reimbark for England. But, previous to their departure, the governor invited William and Frederic to dine with him; and, finding them both to be gentlemen of great information in regard to the situation of the province, he thought it proper to send a letter by them to the secretary of state, as two persons in every respect capable of pointing out the necessity and advantages of a measure which government had then in contemplation. When they arrived in England, they were both closeted with the secretary, who began with asking Frederic's opinion, who gave a succinct and clear account of the matter, but delivered his opinion in such a supercilious and dogmatic manner as gave the minister more disgust by his manner than he had satisfaction by his information; and he was dismissed with that kind of civil and constrained coldness, which clearly proved that he had lost the favourable opinion of the secretary, and sacrificed his fortune to the haughtiness of his spirit. On the contrary, William gave his opinion with equal accuracy, but with the utmost modesty; and, when the minister had heard every thing that he could advance upon the subject, he condescended to shew him a sketch of the intended operations; and, after speaking for a considerable time in defence of his proposed plan, he asked William what he thought of the undertaking; who replied, with an air of the utmost gentleness and good-breeding, that he had formerly conceived those measures would be most salutary and beneficial which had been advised by his friend, Frederic, until he was convinced to the contrary by his lordship's superior reasoning. He had scarcely uttered his opinion, when the minister caught him in his arms, and told him, that he perceived he was not only a gentleman of extensive knowledge in politics, but a warm friend to his country, and that he might depend upon it he would mention him to the king; and indeed he was as good as his word, and, by the force of his interest, procured him a considerable post under government, which he has enjoyed with particular honour ever since, and is enabled, in consequence, to support the intemperate and proud Frederic, who is now reduced to the necessity of being the object of his bounty. Now you see, my dear boy,' said the old soldier, 'by the fate of these two gentlemen, what a prodigious superiority that man has, with a good temper and moderate talents, over him with an enlarged understanding, provided the latter is not regulated by good manners and supported by modesty. 
The old gentleman, having concluded his instructions for my well-being, took a final leave of me, with tears in his eyes, after supplicating heaven to make me prosperous and happy as a man, and honourable and magnanimous as a soldier. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

Conclusion of Captain Blisset's story. 

THE next morning, (continued the gentleman,) I embarked with the regiment for America, and arrived at Boston after a disagreeable and tedious passage of upwards of two months. Not being used to fatigue, the inconveniences I suffered in the voyage, added to the sickness I had continually while at sea, made me curse the hour in which I consented to be a soldier; but, finding the die was cast, and that I must submit to the stern decrees of Fate, I bore my fortune as well as I could, and submitted my body to all the drudgeries and duties of war, in direct opposition to the impulse of my spirit. Habituated as I had been to have my own will obeyed from my childhood, I could but ill brook to be commanded at the caprice of another, and ordered into situations which I disliked, and upon services the most disagreeable; and my own dissatisfaction was increased when I took a comparative view of my brother-officers, who seemed to bear their worst hardships with a degree of pleasure and content, when the most trivial of mine were rendered extremely miserable by the perverseness of my disposition; for no spark of the  amor patriae,  or love of glory, irradiated my breast; I considered myself as a slave, and was consequently unhappy. Full often did I curse those indulgences which I had experienced from my father and mother, and even hated them for giving me an existence, which was become irksome and intolerable by their neglect of all the important parts of the education of a child. 
Not to trouble you too much with a recital of trivial accidents, let it suffice when I acquaint you, that, after a service of something less than two years, I got appointed to a company, and was ordered by the general to take the command of a party that was sent to dislodge some Indians, who were sculking about the woods, to the great annoyance of the rear of the army. A few months previous to this expedition, I must inform you, that I had a quarrel with a lieutenant who happened to be stationed under my command, and I resolved (so diabolical was the complexion of my mind at that period) to take that opportunity of getting him, if possible, out of the way, or, in other words, to use some treacherous means of destroying his life. We had frequent skirmishes with the Indians, in all which my particular enemy, or rather the object of my hatred, came off unhurt, though I studiously placed him in the post of danger for that purpose. As his sight became every day more hateful to me, I watched all opportunities of punishing him for disobedience of orders; but in this too he foiled me; for, knowing the implacability of my heart, and being a brave and sober man, he was uncommonly punctual in the observance of his duty. It being resolved, in council, to make a grand attack upon a post, which the Indians possessed, the next morning at day-break, I determined to place my enemy in the hottest part of the fire; and, if he escaped his death then, I had made up my mind to dispatch him myself, by shooting him through the head. 
Early in the morning we began the attack, which lasted with unremitting fury for some hours; at last I was unfortunately surrounded by some Indians, who made me their prisoner, and carried me off in triumph. I had scarcely arrived among their chiefs when I was ordered to be scalped, a punishment of all others the most dreadful; and they had fastened their hands in my hair, to draw the skin over my scull, which they were going to separate with a knife, when Providence interfered in behalf of a wretch like me; and, to make my humiliation the deeper, chose for its instrument the very lieutenant whose life I intended to destroy. It seems that, hearing of my captivity, he got a handful of men together, and, rushing through the thickest part of the enemy, arrived at the spot just time enough to save me from the bloody catastrophe. 
Overcome with joy at my delivery, I fell at the feet of my benefactor, and asked him how he could think of venturing his life to save so unworthy a being? to which he nobly replied, that he was not ignorant of the hatred I so unjustly bore him; but that a knowledge of my infernal malice, though it might alarm his feelings as a man, could not efface his duty as a Christian, which instructed him to save the life even of his enemy, and, if possible, to return him good for evil. 
I was so awed by the majesty and benevolence of his conduct, that I took a resolution, from that hour, of looking up to him as an example, and amend my life by a recollection of the means by which it had been preserved. 
Nothing remarkable occurred, after this adventure, till the campaign ended, when, the regiment I belonged to being ordered home, I sold out, in order to settle in America, having contracted a soft intimacy with a lady who resided there, and whom I afterwards married. We have lived ever since in the utmost harmony; and, were it not for the intrusion of distress, which indeed" (added the captain with a heavy sigh) has visited us, since our union, but too often, we should be as happy a couple as any breathing under heaven. In short," (continued the stranger,) "I am afraid that the vices of the former part of my life have drawn down a curse upon my innocent wife and children. Here the tears started from his eyes; which so affected me, that I involuntarily wept too. But the stranger, recovering himself, went on as follows: 
I had not been long married, when I received a letter which informed me of the death of my father, and that my mother had married a second husband; and, at the time of my father's decease, his affairs were so embarrassed by the law-suits which he had been maintaining for years, that he had left his family almost in a state of beggary. 
Nor did my own private affairs turn out a whit better; for, having run out the money which I got for my commission, and the principal half of my wife's portion remaining in the hands of a capital merchant in London, who refused to remit any part of it to the continent, we resolved to leave America, and get that satisfaction in England which it was almost impossible to procure at so great a distance. We accordingly sold off all our effects; and my wife and I, with two children and a maid, embarked for the port of London. 
When we arrived here, I took every prudent step, as I then thought, for the recovery of my property; — but, alas! there I was most woefully deceived. I was ridiculous enough to build a certainty of success upon the justice of my cause; but the event has proved that it was but a sorry foundation to erect my hope upon; for, after two years spent in unnecessary protraction, in which time I had expended not only my last guinea, but every valuable I had that could raise one, the momentous affair came to a trial; and I had the mortification to find, that my oppressor's being a richer man than myself was a certain sign that he would prove victorious; and that the boasted laws of this country can afford but little protection to the equitable claims of poverty and honour, when their spirit and their intention can be so easily perverted by the villanous ingenuity of professional man-eaters. In short, sir, I lost my cause for want of sufficient money to fee the counsel, and the judge very gravely decreed against me, because I had not an opportunity of telling him the reasons why he should have done otherwise. 
I shall never forget the situation of my wretched family when I returned to inform them of the melancholy event, which had consigned them to all the horrors of want and desperation. My poor Maria, after she had recovered her senses a little, (for she fainted repeatedly in my arms on the first news of our defeat,) and was assured that such an account could be real, she fell upon her knees, surrounded by her half-famished children, and implored the omnipotent Searcher of all hearts to reject the last claims of mercy, which might be intreated, in his dying hour, by the unprincipled miscreant, who had robbed her poor little ones of that bread, which justice should have given them to satisfy the irresistible appeals of hunger. 'But pardon the presumption of a maddening wretch,' (exclaimed my poor Maria, recollecting herself,) 'for I bow my head in obedience to thy blessed dispensations, and must teach my heart no other language in future but — O Lord, thy will be done! 
The noise, which the tender partner of my misfortunes had made in the wild indulgence of her sorrows, attracted the notice of a person, who was in the adjoining chamber, on a visit to an old couple, one of whom was bed-ridden, and, having been turned out of the hospital as incurable, was obliged to lengthen his woe-fraught being by the casual bounty of the good and charitable. Hearing the moans of distress, he gave a gentle tap at the door; and, lifting up the latch, he entered the room. But, good heavens! how was I amazed to recognise in his person the individual lieutenant that had saved me from the fury of the barbarous Indians! It was some time before I could make him believe who I was, so much had the woes that I had endured, and the difficulties I had experienced, altered my person since we took leave of each other: but, the moment that he was convinced of my identity, he embraced me with all the warmth of an old friend; and, sitting down with a little infant on each knee, asked the particulars of my life, since we had parted, with all possible delicacy and painful curiosity. 
When he had been made acquainted with our story, he took my wife by one hand and me by the other, and bade us not despair, but put our trust in God Almighty, who would receive us, if deserving, into his benign bosom, and shield our little family from the machinations of the wicked and the prostitution of power. 
After a present of some ginger-bread to the children, which I understood he always carried about with him for that purpose, he took his leave, promising to pay us another visit the following morning. And he was as good as his word; for he not only came to make us happy by his advice, but to comfort us by his assistance; and insisted, as Fortune had looked upon him with an eye of kindness since he left America, by advancing him in the army, that I should partake of that bounty, (as he expressed it,) which Providence only sent to the rich that they might become faithful stewards to the poor, by distributing her gifts, with the hand of circumspection and benevolence, among the most necessitous of their fellow-creatures. 
Notwithstanding the number and weight of my distresses, I felt a great consolation in the visits of this worthy officer; and indeed both I and my family must have perished but for the generosity of his disposition. The frequency, with which the remembrance of the malice I once exercised towards him recurred to my mind, hurt my peace exceedingly; but I now strive to expiate the heinousness of such transgressions by uniformly praying for his well-being. 




CHAPTER XXXVII.  


The stranger takes his leave. — Reflections on the vicissitudes of life. — Arrive at the cellar. — A humourous account of a marriage-ceremony, in which the intentions of Hymen are defeated by the influence of Bacchus. 

HERE the officer took his leave, with the warmest wishes for my felicity; and, the hour approaching that I was to meet my friend Crambo at the ordinary, I set forward for that place, contemplating all the way on the vicissitudes of human nature, and the inscrutable and unaccountable methods by which Providence protects us from impending evil, and destroys our fairest hopes of prosperity. These reflections tended to bring on a strong tincture of melancholy in my mind; for, as I looked around me, I fancied that misery had taken up her abode in almost every breast, and that the smiling countenances of many that passed me in the street served but as a temporary veil to cover the real inquietude of the heart within. — The few examples of happiness I had seen, since I started in the world, convinced me of the truth of an observation, I had often heard, which asserts that we are born to suffer much more than to enjoy; but, finding myself arrived at the mouth of the cellar where I was to meet the poet, the fumes of the boiled and roast, that ascended from that receptacle of the sons of Apollo, saluted my nostrils in gales of such delicious flavour, as drove away, in an instant, every other consideration but that of eating and voluptuousness. 
As I descended into the quill-drivers refectory, I heard a loud laugh, which indicated that mirth presided at the board. When I had got far enough into the cellar to have a glimpse of the company, I perceived my friend Crambo as merry as the best of them. I was particularly glad of that sign, as I imagined he had been fortunate enough to touch his bookseller for some cash that morning; and I found afterwards that I was not out in my reckoning, for I had scarcely sat down, when he whispered in my ear that he had been cursed lucky since he saw me, and had absolutely persuaded his publisher, in Pater-noster Row, to advance him half a guinea; at the same time, slipping a couple of shillings into my hand unperceived by the company, added, that he was always happy to have it in his power to assist his friends. Now the poet was called to order by the rest of the company, to listen to a story which Mr. M'Paste, the compiler of a monthly magazine, was going to divert the company with. My friend bowed obedience to the  fiat,  and I sat wrapped up in expectation of hearing something excellent. 

You must know, gentlemen," said the compiler, "that I have the honour of lodging at a chandler's shop; and, being considered as an inmate of the family, I was applied to to write an epithalamium on the approaching nuptials of my landlady with an old tallow-chandler who lived opposite, which were to happen in a few days; and, to have the thing done in a genteel style, it was resolved, by both parties, that it should be celebrated on a Saturday evening. Well, gentlemen, you must suppose every thing going on swimmingly; the bride-cake made; the company invited; and the old yellow tabby, that had been mouldering at the bottom of the bride's drawer, under the ravages of moths and time, for at least twenty years, drawn forth, by the influence of that wanton rogue, Cupid, and newly furbished and farthingaled by the ingenious hands of a modern mantua-maker, to make it, if possible, look fashionable, as it was intended for the gaudy vestment of the bride on that momentous occasion.— Instead of a system, to fasten on her cap, which she had imported but the day before from Cranborn-alley, she wore an old wig of her former husband's, which was frizzled and tortured into the shape necessary for the purpose; and, when fastened on her head, her visage, by the aid of this modish ornament, bore no bad resemblance to the forehead of a Newfoundland dog. 
The company, invited on that memorable evening, consisted of a few select neighbours: — Mrs. Grogram, the old-clothes woman; a rich chimney-sweeper's lady, and her two daughters; a pettifogging attorney; Mrs. Snatch'em, the pawnbroker's widow, from the corner of the opposite alley; the tallow-chandler's nephew; and your humble servant. 
When the clock had struck four, this goodly group had assembled; and it was plain, that the bridegroom had exhausted not only his purse, but his invention, to dress himself out to the best advantage, and make his person as engaging and irresistible as possible. 
He had chosen a deep-coloured Prussian-blue coat, that would have been considered as the pink of elegance about half a century ago, the cuffs being large enough to make a modern waistcoat, with flaps down to his heels; and the dark blue was finely relieved by a large row of brass buttons, which covered at least one-fourth of that part of his habiliments. Added to this, he had on a scarlet waistcoat of prodigious magnitude, a pair of buckskin breeches, and a wig, without powder, in circumference as large as a moderate gooseberry-bush; which, considering the intense heat of the weather, was a dress, taken all together, that must naturally, as you will imagine, attract our notice, if not our admiration. 
After tea, the whole party was summoned to attend the hymeneal altar; and, when we had got to the door, to step into the coaches that waited for our reception, there was as great a croud gathered in the street, to behold our dress and equipage, as if the lord-mayor of London were going to Westminster in solemn procession on the ninth of November, or a show of wild beasts had just arrived from the African deserts. When we were all secured within the coaches, they moved, in awful grandeur, amidst the shouts of the populace, to the parish-church, where the high-priest of Hymen, vulgarly ycleped a parson, waited to unite these extraordinary originals in the solemn bands of holy matrimony. 
In the course of this tremendous service, a few mistakes happened, which sometimes disconcerted the whole business; but you will not wonder at that, when I inform you, that the bridegroom was as deaf as a mill-post; and the priest, when he came to that part of the affair which requires him to ask the bridegroom, if he is willing to take his blessed acquisition to be his true and lawful wife, was forced to bawl as loud as the woman that cries Newcastle salmon in the hundreds of Drury-lane, before he could make him understand the nature of the question; but, however, the bridegroom made ample amends when he did; for, as soon as his ear had caught the intent of the requisition, he answered, with great precipitation, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. But this was not all the impediment which took place; for another important mistake occurred, which was no other than the bridegroom's putting the ring on the wrong finger of his amiable spouse; and this unfortunate stroke of Fate caused an infinite deal of trouble to the parties; for the hero of the evening, being a man of a narrow and avaricious disposition, had purchased a second-hand ring for the occasion, from his neighbour, the pawnbroker, which, unluckily, not being measured to the lady's finger, proved too small; but the bridegroom, by dint of personal strength, had absolutely forced it on the poor gentlewoman's middle finger ere the mistake was found out; and then, the endeavour to pull it off being found impossible, the ceremony was finished without it, and the blessing perhaps conveyed with equal efficacy to the parties, notwithstanding so gross a violation of prescribed order. 
As we returned home, the bride expressed some doubts as to the validity of the obligation they had mutually entered into, as she imagined the blunder of her yoke-fellow, in the wrong application of that important appendage to matrimony on the finger of a lady, had in a great degree defeated the intention of that sacred business; and she began to enlarge on the stupidity of some people with such a tincture of bitterness, that we certainly should have had a matrimonial duet, in proper character, before the consummation, if I had not luckily observed, that the mistake was of no sort of consequence whatever, for that the personal liberty of his majesty's liege subjects might be charmed away, with equal force, by placing the ring on the wrong finger as well as on the right. As my landlady paid a sort of deference to my opinion, I had the good fortune to accommodate the matter before it arrived at what might be called a downright dispute, but not without a few oblique hints, from the lady, which proved pretty clearly to the company, that she was not perfectly satisfied with a husband, who did not, upon all occasions, know what use to make of his wife's ring. 
But now, the cavalcade arriving at the bride's door, the betrothed couple were handed out of the carriage, attended by the huzzas of three-fourths of the vagabond-inhabitants of that enlightened and elegant quarter of the town. As soon as the whole party was well housed, we sat down to a cold repast of boiled beef, ham, pigs-cheek, and jellies, with plenty of Whitbread's best brown stout, pipes and tobacco, and a bowl of punch almost capacious enough to swim a fleet of West-Indiamen. Nor would I have you understand, gentlemen, that this assemblage of dainties was provided in vain; on the contrary, the only spirit of ambition, that seemed to reign among the guests, was, who should devour the most: totally regardless of the use of knives and forks, which they thought superfluous, as heaven had given them fingers, they began the attack with the appetites of aldermen, and continued the siege with the industry of pigs; till, at last, what with the punch and good living, the major part of the company began to stagger about the room, the ladies not excepted; and the bride and bridegroom made such direct overtures of fondness, before their guests, as plainly evinced that they wished them all at the devil, that they might be at full liberty to put the finishing stroke to a business which the church had so recently sanctified with its infallible authority. But, alas! that grim disposer of human events, vulgarly called Fate, doubtless envious of their approaching raptures, cruelly determined that this should not be, and the lovely bride panted in vain for those pleasures, which Destiny decreed should exist only in her warm imagination. 
To drop all metaphorical descriptions, and come to the point, I must inform you, that some wags, who frequented a public house in the same street, entered into a combination to put a trick upon the tallow-chandler, which should deprive him of the sweet society of his bride for one night at least; and they effected it in the following manner. One of them got a note conveyed to the bridegroom, (who, by this time, was half-seas over,) requesting his immediate attendance at a friend's house, upon some business of the most material consequence to his peace, at the same time desiring him to steal away unperceived by the company at his house, and promising that he should be detained only a few minutes at farthest. The credulous maker of candles no sooner received this mischievous epistle, than he stole away to the appointed rendezvous, where a man was dressed up as a countryman, just arrived from Lincolnshire with an account of his brother's death, and that he had left him a great fortune; at the same time apologising for the manner of communicating the intelligence, as apprehensive of disordering the tender nerves of his lady if he had gone directly to his house with such a dismal tale upon his wedding-day. 'Dismal tale!' cries the tallow-chandler, interrupting him, half fuddled, 'why, damme, it is the best story I have heard these seven years, and, damme, you are the best friend I have seen these seven years. To be sure, d'ye see, as how I ought to be sorry for the death of a relation; but, damme, never mind; — though he was a cursed sort of a curmudgeon,' cries the bridegoom, 'I hope he is gone to a better place; at any rate, d'ye see, my friend, if he is happy, why I am contented. 
During this exemplary dialogue, the pretended countryman plied the tallow-chandler with large glasses of punch, half the ingredients of which were strong brandy, until they had brought him to a proper pitch of insensibility, when one of the party came running in to inform his associates in iniquity that all was ready, which, it seems, was a watch-word for bringing out the bridegroom; — and, each taking hold of an arm and a leg, they conveyed him to the door, where a stage-coach was waiting for some passengers; and, taking him to the rear of the carriage, they threw the poor tallow-chandler, by main force, into the basket, like a stinking salmon into the Thames, in which situation he lay, bent double, and snoring as loud as the hogs at Vauxhall, until he was waked, the next morning, at Winchester, by the ostler's throwing in a heavy portmanteau, which, alighting on the breast of the intoxicated bridegroom, entirely broke the fetters of his repose, as well as three of his false ribs; and he was instantly dragged out of his uncomfortable bed-chamber, roaring like a bull with agony, by the servants of the inn, who secured him as a fellow who only feigned to be drunk, and had stolen into the basket with a design of robbing the stage on the journey. 
These particulars I have since learned from one of the conspirators. Thus was the poor fellow, in the warm moments of fond expectation, like another Tantalus, snatched from the enjoyment of bliss just as he got the cup of happiness to his lip; while his poor lady at home, overcome by grief and anger at the disappointment of her wishes, fell into hysterics for the remainder of the night, and from which she was not intirely recovered until the next morning, when some timely draughts of burnt brandy and nutmeg relieved her so far, that she was enabled to sit up in her bed, and listen to the condolance of her female friends, who had kindly assembled for that pious purpose; but the poor woman was so woe-begone and dejected, that she could answer their consolation and conjecture only with her tears. 




CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

The poet gives me some salutary advice. — He is attracted by my abilities. — Consults me on his literary pursuits. — I forfeit his friendship by the exercise of my candour. — A sarcastic colloquy between the host and the poet. — The latter's overthrow and discomfiture. 

AFTER the company had applauded Mr. M'Paste for his story, which he assured them he should work into a tale, and have inserted in the next month's publication, we all sat down to dinner; at the conclusion of which my friend Crambo and I retired to another part of the room, in order to discourse upon our private affairs, and think of some expedient by which I might be enabled to get a livelihood, without existing by the sale of the few articles of wearing-apparel I had left. After ruminating upon a variety of projects, the poet advised me to look into the daily papers, where I should be certain of reading, among the list of the  wanteds,  something that would answer my purpose. At the same time the generous son of Apollo made me an unlimited offer of his purse and friendship, such as they were, upon all occasions; and, throwing the former upon the table, emptied its contents, which consisted of two half-crown pieces, a sixpence with a hole in it, a few halfpence, and a tobacco-stopper. 
I was so much affected by this instance of his generosity, that I could not refrain from getting up and hugging him in my arms, as the best and most disinterested friend I had in the world; a compliment which he returned with great ardour, and accompanied it with an observation even more pleasing than his bounty, namely, that he had been attracted solely by the purity of my judgement and my abilities as a scholar. Such an eulogium from any one would have given me pleasure; but, when I considered it as coming from the mouth of one of the greatest authors of the age, (for such I had conceived him to be from his own broad insinuations,) I was transported by my vanity to a pitch of the utmost extravagance, and did not fail to extol my panegyrist to the skies in terms of unbounded flattery; all which, though but the incense of a novice like me, he received with peculiar complaisance, and was pleased to declare himself as happy in my commendation as if the Stagyrite himself had peeped from his tomb to signify his approbation of the labours of his brain. 
After swearing an eternal attachment to each other, he took a parcel of papers from a pocket made within-side his waistcoat; and, spreading them upon the table in particular order, addressed me as follows: "Mr. Varnish," said the diminutive bard, "I am now going to give you an unquestionable proof of my confidence, which no man in my circumstances would, if he were not previously convinced of your experience and taste as a scholar, as well as of your unshaken fidelity to my interest as an individual. In short, my dear sir," exclaimed the poet, squeezing my hand, "I am going to shew you some hints, mere literary atoms to be sure, but such, I flatter myself, as, when called into form, will not only secure me the  otium cum dignitate  at present, but, what is infinitely more dear to my imagination, will hand me down to posterity with a laurel wreathed around my brow, so ample, that the very shadow of it shall hide the weaknesses of my nature. Here, my dear friend, are the precious morsels," said the poet, holding up the papers, "upon which I must inevitably build my fame and fortune. But, to return to the intent of this communication, let us now commune a little upon the scheme I have in agitation; and I intreat you, as my particular friend, to point out such parts as shall appear objectionable to you; for the very best writers that ever existed have been obliged to the assistance of their friends on these occasions, Mr. Varnish, you know: — Pope had his Bolingbroke, Prussia's monarch his Voltaire, and Moliere his old woman;  humanum est errare;  but it is the lot of our nature; the most brilliant genius that ever honoured the blazing ages of antiquity was not perfect. No," continues my friend, Crambo, "absolute perfection is not to be found on this earth, that is certain. But, à-propos, to business, or perhaps you may think the exordium of more importance than the subject: the affair, that I mean to consult you upon, my young Aristotle, is an epic poem; and the basis of it is," said the poet, leaning across the table, and whispering in my ear with a tone of exultation, the siege of Gibraltar. — Well," says the little author, looking me full in the face, and rubbing his hands, "I hope you will admit, my friend, that I have been tolerably lucky in my subject at least." "I think so too, indeed," replied I; "for I know of no theme so proper, for the pen of an Englishman, as the glorious atchievements of his own countrymen." 
"You charm me by the propriety of your observations," replies the poet; "I protest you have an amazing deal of judgement, apt and comprehensive; and, what is better, damme but you are a true patriot." 

I bowed my acknowledgements for the favour of such compliments, when the bard produced the argument of the first book for my consideration. — When I had perused it a little, I ventured to point out an inaccuracy in the poet's manner of treating the story; to which he significantly replied, with a nod of the head,  Aye, aye, read on, my friend, if you please; the deeper you get into the marrow, the more you will be ravished with the performance. 

I proceeded, agreeably to his directions, to read farther, and carefully to examine the matter as I went on. At last, coming, in my humble opinion, to a manifest impropriety, I gave my opinion of it with all the freedom of a man who felt himself interested in the reputation of his friend. But I found, that the author was so far from taking it in this point of view, that he demurred against my observation, and added, —  Pish! man, I perceive you are not sufficiently acquainted with the subject. 

I told him, in reply,  that, though I did not pretend to be a poet, I could lay some claim to a strong memory; and that informed me, the plot was ill managed; and, if such a breach of propriety were admissible in an epic poem, it was not to be reconciled to the laws of truth; and, to depart from truth, in such a theme, were to dishonour the cause he meant to immortalise.  But here I found that I had overshot my mark; for the little bard, looking at me with a countenance reddened high with ferocious indignation, snatched the manuscript out of my hand with great violence, and told me, in direct terms, that he had been grossly deceived in ranking me for a man of understanding, when I had not discernment enough to discover a literary beauty, if it were even set down in Roman capitals. 
I now began to smell my error, and would willingly have retracted, but I found it was too late; for, upon my attempting to open my mouth, he turned round to the landlord of the place, and cried aloud, "Damme, landlord, here is a pretty fellow pretends to judge of an epic poem, and he has not read enough to distinguish between the excellence of the Iliad and the mummery and trash contained in the life of Tom Hickathrift! Here, you Mr. Critic," cries the bard to me, "be so good as to return me the two shillings, you dog, I lent you to pay for your dinner." "What? you have lent him money, too!" says the landlord, laughing heartily. "Yes," replies, the poet, "and he has made me a damned grateful return for it." — By Ch—t," says the landlord, I am glad of it." "Why are you glad?" replies the bard, bristling up to the host like an enraged turkey-cock. "Why?" cries the other, "because you would sooner be giving your money to any idle vagabond, like that, than pay your lawful debts." — You tell a damned lie," says the poet. I will let you know what it is to give a gentleman the lie in his own house, and be damned to you," replies the other." "Why, you poor dog, that is impossible," says the bard, "for you never kept one, but have spent your life under ground, grubbing for an existence like a mole in a meadow, until you have become as blind, to your own interest, as the reptile you imitate." "Blind!" says the landlord, with all the dignity he could assume. "Aye, I say blind," cries the follower of the muses, "or you would never affront a man of genius, when he condescends to eat in your infernal regions." "Condescend to eat, quotha!" replies the subterranean cook; — "damme, you snivelling dog, you know you would have been starved long ago, if it had not been for many a good slice from my surloin, which I suffered you to take upon tick from a motive of charity; you know I did, you ungrateful scoundrel." "Surloin!" cries the author, enraged to the summit of madness by the foregoing remarks; — "damme, you never had a surloin in your cellar." "What had I then, you mongrel maker of verses?" rejoins the host. "Ox-cheek and neck of beef," says the other. "And too good for you, and be damned to you," replies the landlord. "You lie, you scoundrel," cries the bard. Do I?" says the other; "damme, I will teach you better manners;"— and immediately threw the remains of a shin of beef at the poet, which striking him on the side of his head, he instantly measured his length upon the floor, and, growling, bit the dust. 
Now, hostilities on both sides beginning to cease, and finding that I had not the most distant expectation of regaining my former post in the little author's good opinion, I pulled out the two shillings; and, giving them to the landlord for the poet, with a heart ready to burst with vexation, I walked up stairs, to meditate at my leisure upon the instability of human friendship. 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

Take a lodging. — The symbols of an author. — Reflections on the neglect of genius.—Walk out, and meet with an old acquaintance. — My prejudice against the count removed. 

I HAD not proceeded far in the street before I recollected, that it was a step absolutely necessary to provide myself with a lodging; and, as the evening was advancing with rapid strides, and the enamoured charioteer of day was posting to his Thetis on the wings of love, I thought it high time to be as industrious in the settlement of that business as possible. I had scarcely taken the resolution, when, passing by a mean sort of a house, I perceived a bill stuck on the window, signifying that they had lodgings to let for single gentlemen. — Though I had but very slender pretensions to the character of a gentleman, I resolved to try what sort of accommodation the house afforded; and, accordingly, knocking at the door, a woman came, who first took an accurate survey of my figure in so surly a manner as convinced me that she was not very fond of my appearance, and then asked my business. I replied, that I wanted a lodging, and, if any in her house suited me, I had no objection to take them. — She told me, I was an utter stranger to her, to be sure; but, as she conceived something favourable from my countenance, if we could agree, why she would as soon let me have a room in her house as another; that, to be sure, she never had any thing but gentlemen lodge in her house; "but," says the old hag, "we must not always judge from appearances; handsome is that handsome does; and your money may be as good to me as another's." 
After this preamble I had a strong inclination to go away, thinking the lodgings might be too elegant for me, until she informed me that she had but one room unoccupied, and the last gentleman that lived in it was a poet. "Oh ho! my good landlady," says I, "shew me the apartment directly, for I am sure, if it was not too good for a poet, it will do very well for your humble servant." So saying, I shut the door, and followed the poor woman, up four pair of stairs, into a back garret. "Here," cries she, leaning upon an old table to recover her breath, — "this is the only place I have to spare at present, and this has been empty but three weeks, only since poor Mr. Couplet left it." "Aye, aye, my good woman," replied I, "I could have guessed at the last tenant by the relies of his profession. These are the true symbols of genius," cried I, taking up the stump of a pen, a washerwoman's bill, and a shoe without a heel. "You are merry," said the old lady; "but I assure you Mr. Couplet was as fine a spoken man as you would meet with in a summer's day." "And, pray," replied I, "how came you to lose so accomplished a lodger?" "Aye, poor gentleman!" cries the landlady, wiping her eyes; "good lack! he was was arrested one evening on a note of his printer's, and is now writing a parcel of sermons, for a Norfolk clergyman, in the master's side of the Fleet prison." "Yes, I thought it would come to that," replied I, when you mentioned his profession; for there are only two things of which a man of genius may be said to be certain in this world." "And, pray, what are they?" asked my landlady. "A prison while he exists, and a grave when he is no more: he is consigned to the first because he has more spirit than oeconomy, and he is indebted for the latter to the convenience of his neighbours; and, what is still more melancholy, there are many persons, who will give a guinea for his works, bound in Morocco, when he is dead, that would perhaps have denied him the loan of a crown, when living, to have protracted his miserable existence." "Anon!" cried the woman. "Oh! nothing," rejoined I:— how much do you ask for this apartment?" "Two shillings a week is the lowest that I can afford it at," cries the other; "if you are willing to give that, you may take possession directly." I nodded assent to her proposal, and the bargain was ratified. 
The woman was retiring out of the room before I observed that my apartment was totally deficient in one necessary, and even indispensable, article of furniture, namely, a bed; and, upon my intimating this defect to the wrinkled gentlewoman, she waddled over to an old chest of drawers, as I imagined, and, unhinging the sides, let down a bedstead with all the apparatus, in the same breath informing me, that there was one, at my service, good enough for the best man in the land. Though I was not an entire convert to her method of thinking in regard to the beauty of the affair, I was very well satisfied, as it was full as elegant as I could wish in such a situation; so, wishing my landlady safe down stairs, I sat upon one corner of my couch, with a heart heavy laden with sorrow, and my arms enfolded, and broke out into the following ejaculation: —  Hapless, miserable, man! how art thou subjected to the caprice of Fortune! who, not satisfied with making thy wretched being groan under the pressure of pain and hunger, and subject to the inclement elements, adds, to aggravate thy calamities, the intolerable stings of mental pain. To what purpose are we decreed to exist? if to prolong a series of days clouded with misfortune, it were better that we were altogether extinct; for the continuance of a life such as mine is not worth the solicitation. I am poor, and consequently must be despised; and, being naturally unsuspicious, am hourly liable to the subtle arts of hypocrisy and imposition. 

After I had indulged myself in this reverie, I sat musing upon the most probable means of raising a small supply of money. I revolved upon every expedient that my fancy could suggest to my despair; but found them all either unproductive as to the desired end, or impossible to be put in execution. I was rapidly sinking from one base idea to another, until I found my mind a chaos of confusion, in which desperation and shame alternately passed before me. To relieve myself from this heavy embarrassment, I took up my hat, and, walking down stairs sullenly, rushed into the street, with a full determination to raise some money by one means or another. 
As I was rambling along in this state of perturbation, without knowing which path to pursue for the best, I felt a tap on the shoulder, from a person behind, which was given with an air of great familiarity; and, upon my turning round to recognise the person who had saluted me so unexpectedly, a young man held out his hand as an overture of friendship, and gave me to understand, that he had enjoyed the pleasure of my company, a few days before, at an ordinary near the Seven Dials. I instantly recollected him to be one of the gentlemen, to whose notice my very good friend, the count, had introduced me. As this rencounter brought his ungenerous behaviour to me fresh into my memory, I told my new acquaintance the whole story, without disguising the smallest circumstance. When I came to that part of the narrative, where he declared his intentions of making my fortune by marriage, and had so completely lulled my understanding by the force of the grossest flattery that was ever directed to a human being, the young man burst into an immoderate fit of laughter. As I considered the excessive mirth of my new friend to be another instance of my disgrace, in consequence of the count's lies and ingenuity, I inveighed against him in the severest terms of reproach that my resentment could furnish me with, and swore to chastise him personally the first time that I should meet with him. Here my new acquaintance thought proper to correct the violence of my language, by observing, that, admitting the count had played a few of his usual pranks at my expence, I should yet find it my interest to keep well with him. "Besides," added he, "the account you have heard of his character, from the landlady, must have arisen from prejudice; for it is not only overcharged, but in many respects entirely false, and could have proceeded from no other but the mouth of his enemy; for, though I will admit that he is fond of indulging an eccentric disposition, and sometimes fastens too close upon the weaknesses of mankind, believe me that he is neither destitute of principle or of friendship, but very often exercises both, in the most disinterested manner, for the advantage of his fellow-creatures." This testimony of the stranger, in favour of the count, tended considerably to reduce the ill opinion I had formed of him; and the more particularly when my new companion assured me, that he would pay me what he had borrowed the first time that he saw me, and would chearfully lend me as much more, provided he had it in his pocket, and my necessities called for such an instance of his generosity. 



CHAPTER XL. 

We agree to drink together. — I am comforted by his discourse. — He favours me with a short history of his life. — The melancholy death of a good woman, occasioned by the wickedness of mankind. — My spirits raised by Mr. Butler's philosophy.—Pledge my waist-coat.—Am promised relief by the keeper of a register-office. 

IT was now proposed, by my new adherent, that we should drink together to our better acquaintance; and I felt myself extremely mortified to tell him, that I was obliged to defer that favour. "Oh! damn it," replies the young fellow, "if you are shy from the want of ready cash, never mind that. To be sure I am not very rich myself," continues he; "but, as what we shall spend new will not make me a penny poorer at the year's end, I must insist upon your accompanying me. They fell excellent porter at the Crooked Billet, yonder," cries he, pointing to an alehouse at the end of the street; "and take my word for it, that it will warm the cockles of your heart, and operate like a draught from the Lethean lake; it will make you forget your cares, my boy," giving me a hearty flap upon the back; — so come along, do you see, and make no more words about the matter." 
By the force of this persuasion, I followed him to the house; and, taking our seats, he called for a tankard of the best, which soon made its appearance, mantling with a majestic head at the top, like a small-cauliflower; which he gently removed aside, and drank to our mutual prosperity; then, offering me the vessel in my turn, I was so fond of the health-giving beverage, that I took care to see the bottom of the tankard before my lips would permit the salubrious liquid to separate from their, embraces. 
When we had become a little more intimate, by the influence of the tankard, (for it is wonderful how forcibly that operates in cementing friendships,) my new acquaintance informed me, without reserve, of his situation in life, and his willingness to prove of service to me if I thought him worthy of such a distinction; at the same time assuring me, that he was himself by no means unacquainted with misfortune. I had scarcely time to thank him for his kind offer, when he unbosomed himself in the following terms: 

My name, sir, says he, is Butler; my father was an officer in a marching regiment, who died when I was but ten years old, and left my mother to struggle with an iniquitous world, incumbered with two children, — myself, and my sister, who was my elder by two years. As they had contrived, in my father's lifetime, to live in a style of some respectability, she had contracted a numerous acquaintance, some of whom had it in their power to assist her; — and, as she had frequently received the most unconditional offers of friendship from them, she thought it no breach of propriety or delicacy, to call their professions into practice, when she found herself in a situation that made so exalted an exercise of the human wishes necessary. But here my good mother found she had been leaning for assistance upon a broken staff; for, as soon as her polite friends discovered (and they possess uncommon sagacity upon these occasions) that her circumstances denied her the power of fulfilling the reciprocity of beneficial offices, they gradually fell off in their attachments, and the visible declension of their friendship began with pity and ended with contempt. Dejected with the unfavourable prospect of her affairs, she found that she must exert her utmost industry to maintain herself and family; which she effected, however, very tolerably, by taking in plain-work, in the performance of which, my sister, though young, afforded her considerable assistance; — and the profits of that, annexed to the scanty pittance allowed from government to the widows of subaltern officers, just furnished a bare sufficiency to bring us up with decency and frugality. In this confined manner we contrived to jog on, until, one day, she received an unexpected visit from a distant relation, who had held a place of importance under the East-India company, and who proposed to use his interest with the directors in procuring me a place in some of the public offices. My mother was overjoyed at this prospect of my success, and, in consequence, strained every nerve to give me a suitable education. When I had attained my fifteenth year, not hearing from her kinsman, she wrote him a letter upon the subject, which he condescended to answer after a delay of four months; but the sweetness of the contents attoned for the seeming coolness and neglect; — for, in that letter, he assured my mother that she need not be uneasy, for he had got an absolute promise that I should be appointed to the first vacancy that fell. And, as the appearances of good fortune are sometimes not content with coming alone, another circumstance took place, at this time, which gave additional happiness to the poor widow. My sister, who was remarkably tall and handsome for her years, had attracted the notice of a gentleman of immense property; and his passion was so deeply rooted, that he wrote a letter to my sister, desiring an interview, in which he made the most ardent and unequivocal declaration of his love. My sister had no sooner received this flaming epistle, than she ran in triumph to her mother, and shewed the flattering testimony of her own powers of attraction; and the poor woman was not less transported than her daughter, for she literally believed that the endowments of her child were capable of subduing the heart of an emperor, and had no doubt of the reality of the circumstance. Indeed this was my good parent's weak side; for, if ever she discovered more folly than usual, it was in the extravagance of her raptures, whenever she heard the voice of deceit attribute that degree of beauty to my sister, and understanding to myself, which the dispensations of Providence had perhaps denied both the one and the other. But, as the partiality is amiable, though destructive, it ought to be forgiven. 
To return to the narrative: my sister was permitted to give her enamoured swain such encouragement as was consistent with prudence; but, at the same time, to take no material steps in the affair without first consulting her mother. In the infancy of the attachment, poor Louisa (for that was her name) faithfully fulfilled the engagement entered into with her fond parent;—but, at last she permitted her lover to make some small inroads upon decorum, which she well knew would be displeasing to the author of her being, and for that reason she concealed them from her knowledge; till, at length, poor girl! she waded so deep in the habits of deception, that even the idea of a falsehood had lost its consequent horror. 
Unhappy Louisa! she little imagined that she was wounding her eternal happiness, when she lost sight of the beauty of truth. In short, eventually passing from one indiscretion to another, the rapid approaches of vice became less formidable as they became more frequent, until prudence at length abdicated her gentle bosom, and left the defenceless victim a prey to the alluring arts of prostitution. 
To come to the catastrophe in a few words. My poor sister fell a prey to the insinuations of a villain, who first perjured his soul to draw her from the arms of innocence and peace, and then consigned her to destruction for giving faith to his detestable and infernal frauds. On the news of this miserable event, my mother was seized with a fit of sickness, which terminated in a deep melancholy; and her disorder was strengthened, when, at her particular request, I went to the India-house, to enquire after her relation, from whom she had not heard for a considerable time, and learned, to my sorrow, that he had been gone to the continent for some months before; and, so far from having got me the situation he promised, that he had never so much as mentioned my name to the board of directors. Both these disappointments affected her peace so much, that her melancholy ended in a confirmed madness; and she died, poor woman!" (cried Mr. Butler with the tears in his eyes,) "in Bedlam-hospital, a shocking spectacle of woe and wretchedness. 
Since her death, I have procured myself a decent livelihood by writing for attorneys, in which situation I have continued ever since. To be sure, we are obliged to work devilish hard for what we earn; and the service is not the most respectable. Besides, I am perfectly convinced, that, if the finer feelings of human nature are to be rendered callous by example, it must be by associating with that right honourable fraternity. — But, as the motto of our family has been  Il faut manger,  from time immemorial, I am sometimes obliged to sacrifice my ease and my ambition to fulfil the intent of so important an obligation. 

When my companion had finished his story, he ordered the pot to be replenished, and bade me not permit the accidental strokes of misfortune, which visited every man at some period of his life or another, to cast me down; at the same time, pulling out his purse, he requested me to accept of the loan of a few shillings; but this I absolutely refused, telling him, with great firmness, that I would sooner put an intire end to my being, than continue to live a burden upon fortuitous charity. He clasped my hand in his, and told me that he admired my spirit, but advised me not to let it carry me too far; that there was a medium between rashness and meanness; and again intreated my acceptance of his offer; but, on my refusal a second time, he put his purse in his pocket, asking me, with a grave air, how I intended to exist. This question made me thoughtful; but I replied, — "I trust I shall be able to do that by my industry: I mean to enquire for some place." "I suppose you are not over nice," says my friend. "No," I replied: "if it will but afford me a living, I shall be satisfied, till something better offers." "Then your best way," rejoins he, "is to make application to a register-office, and they will direct you to a place immediately; the fees of office amount only to a few shillings," added he; — and, if you will not let me assist you, you had better leave something at my uncle's, and he will lend you half-a-crown with the greatest readiness; and you may fetch it away at pleasure, when you find it convenient." But will not that be taking too great a liberty with your relation?" cried I; "besides, you know that I am a total stranger to his person." Here my friend smiled, and told me, that the word  uncle  was only a metaphorical expression, in common use among all men of the world, and applied to those people who get a convenient livelihood by lending money on pledges; "and you need not have any scruples of delicacy," cries my friend, "on the score of making use of their purse; for they will take pretty good care not to lay you under the smallest obligation to their politeness, or even to their humanity." Upon the strength of this information, I went to a house almost opposite, and which was distinguished from the rest by the sign of three blue balls; and, entering by a small door in a dark passage, I pulled off my waistcoat, and deposited it with the man of the shop for two shillings, though it had cost me a guinea but a short time before, and was not a bit the worse for wear. However, I pocketed the money; and, buttoning my coat from the top to the bottom, I hurried back to my friend, who congratulated me on the dexterity with which I had executed the business. He having previously insisted upon discharging the reckoning, we parted, extremely well pleased with each other, and engaging, provided I was not employed in service, to dine with him, the following day, at the ordinary where I first had the happiness of attracting his notice. 
I did not lose a moment in delay, but went immediately to a register-office that was kept in Holborn. I had scarcely signified the intention of my visit, when the keeper informed me that he had several places that would suit me exactly, and requested me to come in the morning, and he would satisfy me more fully in the matter. 
I was so much pleased with the issue of this adventure, that I went home, and slept that night with unusual comfort; but, waking before the hour appointed by the office-keeper for my attendance, I lay in bed ruminating upon the happiness that awaited my embraces; and, so fondly was I wrapped in the pleasures of the imagination, that I thought I saw Fortune smiling upon my wishes; which elevated my heart so much, that every pulse in my body accorded with peace and harmony. 



CHAPTER XLI. 

Attend at the office in the morning.—Dispatched to my new place.—My reception by the housekeeper.—Pass an ordeal before my master. — Approved of, and made happy. 

BEFORE I got up, a thousand pleasurable circumstances arose in my mind, and I had no doubt but I had arrived at the end of my calamities. At last, hearing the clock give notice, that the long-expected hour of nine was come, I leaped out of bed with uncommon sprightliness, and surveyed my garret with rapture as I put on my clothes; for those objects, that had appeared to me disagreeable but the evening before, wore now a more graceful aspect, so much does the beauty of all exterior objects depend upon the serenity and tincture of the mind. 
When I had dressed myself, I sallied forth to the temple of Fortune, for such had my fond fancy pictured the register-office to be; and I did not permit the grass to grow under my feet in the journey, for I performed it as quick as if the preservation of my life depended upon the speed I should use in that expedition. I got to the house just as one of the understrappers of the place was opening the shop for the public accommodation. When I told him my errand, he looked at me with some surprise, and said, it was very lucky that I had not called the family up in the middle of the night; and added, that, for his part, he was much obliged to me that I had patience to wait until he had pulled down the first shutter. I could not help feeling some resentment towards the author of these sarcastic remarks upon my eagerness for employment, but resolved to suppress my anger at any rate, and not suffer my passions to operate, at so critical a time, to the disadvantage of my interest; so, apparently taking all in good part, I sat down in the shop to wait until the principal should think proper to honour me with his presence. 
During the time of my attendance in the office, a great number of young people of both sexes came in, with some of whom I entered into conversation, and learned, from their discourse, that the hand of necessity had not been employed in oppressing me alone; but that a considerable number of other people had received an equal share of her regard, who perhaps deserved, from their merits, a very different fate. 
At last, when my patience was well-nigh exhausted, the director of the office made his appearance in a morning-gown and a blue velvet cap, and, eyeing me among the croud of claimants, called me on one side, and gave me to understand there was a family, at the west end of the town, that wanted a servant immediately, and that he believed I should find the place not only easy, but comfortable; at the same time giving me to understand, that I must take this part of his behaviour as an instance of his great regard for me, as it was not usual with him to be so expeditious; but that he had conceived a liking for me, from the first, from the manner and modesty of my application, and had determined, in consequence, to lose no time in settling me to my advantage. After I had returned him my warmest thanks for his kindness, I gave him a shilling, and, taking his recommendation to the family, I set out in quest of a new place of servitude with a heart as light as a feather. 
When I arrived at the house to which I was directed, the door was opened by an old woman, turned of fifty, who seemed to carry about her person all the dignity and consequence of a housekeeper, and I found afterwards that I was not deceived by my conjectures. — When I told her the nature of my errand, she began to question me as to my age, and if I had ever been in service before; to all which interrogatories I gave such proper answers, that she deigned to tell me, that she believed I would answer her master's purpose, bidding me sit down in the kitchen until she went up stairs to see if the old gentleman was stirring. In this state I continued for about ten minutes, when a healthy rosy-cheeked wench came into the kitchen; and, under pretence of wiping some dishes, she took an opportunity of surveying my figure from the corner of her eye, which I imagined she did not think displeasing; for, turning round, she asked me, with a smile of hospitable complaisance, if I would eat any thing that morning, or, if I had an inclination for some table-beer, she would draw me some. I returned her many acknowledgements for these instances of her good-nature, and one word begot another, till I found myself inclined to be extremely talkative, from the friendly complexion of her manners; and she was inspired with confidence from the seeming candour of my disposition. The first question she put to me, that savoured of curiosity, and proved her in full possession of the true female spirit, was exactly as follows:  I supposes you are the young man that I heard old Honour, the housekeeper, say was coming to live in our family.  To this home thrust I replied, "Yes, I came with that intention, my dear; but whether I shall succeed or not depends upon the will of the person who is to employ me." "Oh! as for that," cries the damsel, "if you have the good fortune to be pleasing to Mrs. Honour, my master will take you to-night before tomorrow; for he leaves all them there matters to her." As I thought this was a piece of intelligence well worth attending to, I questioned the nymph of the kitchen very particularly as to the real situation of Mrs. Honour; and found that she had lived in the family for many years, and, by her upright conduct and fidelity, had acquired a very great ascendency over the inclinations of the old gentleman, her master;— I found, likewise, from my communicative fellow-servant, that the family consisted of the old gentleman, and his niece, a beautiful young lady of about eighteen, who was at that time absent from the family, on a visit to a relation at Epping-forest, and whose return was most anxiously wished for by the servants, as the sweetness of her temper not only charmed all those that came near her, but likewise tended to correct that of the old gentleman, her uncle, whose natural turn of mind partook of too much acidity, when it was not diverted from its ill-natured pursuits by the persuasive gentleness of his amiable niece. Those two, with the housekeeper, the ruddy lass who entertained me with the family-anecdotes, a housemaid, and myself, formed the domestic establishment of this respectable, though confined, circle. 
I was now summoned by Mrs. Honour, who had come into the kitchen for that purpose, to follow her up stairs into her master's room ▪  that I might undergo such enquiries as he should think necessary to make preparatory to my preferment. When we had ascended two pair of stairs, she bade me stay in the landing-place till her master was ready; accordingly she went into an adjoining chamber, but returned in a few minutes, beckoning me to follow her, and tread as lightly as possible. I obeyed her directions with such a palpitation of my heart as made me imagine I could even hear its throbbings against my ribs. When we came to an inner room, I perceived the old gentleman, sitting at a table, with a napkin under his chin, and very seriously employed in demolishing a large bowl of bread and milk, which I afterwards understood to be his daily breakfast. 

This new master of mine had passed his grand climacteric at least a dozen years; but, notwithstanding, his aspect was healthy and florid; a large nose, somewhat inclined to the aquiline, parted too small grey eyes, which seemed to twinkle with asperity, and emit the rays of discord and ill-nature. When he was given to understand that I waited his pleasure, he took no farther notice than by nodding his head and eating the remainder of his mess with an additional haste. When he had finished his morning's repast, he threw himself back in his chair; and, pulling a pair of spectacles from a case, he fixed them on his tremendous nose with great deliberation, and sat looking at me, for a few minutes, with such circumspective curiosity, as if he intended to measure the exact altitude of my person. During this critical survey of the grey-headed senior, I not only blushed from ear to ear, but trembled in every limb, lest, on so nice an investigation of my figure and appearance, I might be found deficient in the requisites for a servant, at least in the old gentleman's eyes. But he soon removed those apprehensions, by observing to his housekeeper, that my person corresponded with her account, and he had no objection to employ me, provided my character were unexceptionable. At this declaration, I pulled the lieutenant's letter from my pocket, and was eagerly going to present it to the old man for his perusal; but he seemed to retreat from my endeavour, with an observation, that I need not be in such a devilish hurry; and, turning to his housekeeper, "Why, Honour," says he,  this lad you have brought me seems as much transported at the idea of eating a good dinner as a hungry poet at a twelve-penny ordinary. I hope he is not half-starved; egad, if he is, he will cost me more in a month than would pay his wages for a year.  The housekeeper making no reply to this sarcastic interrogation, I made the old gentleman an humble salute, and told him, that my eagerness arose from an ardent desire of having the honour to serve him, and not from any other motive.— He appeared somewhat pleased at my apology, and told me it was very well; at the same time he ordered his housekeeper to prepare for my reception on the evening of the next day. 

Perfectly happy at the success of my application, I left my new master, and was going into the kitchen immediately, to inform the good-natured damsel of my reception; but I found that measure needless; for, as I opened the door that led to the landing-place, I discovered her at the passage ready to wish me joy; by which circumstance I found, that the inquisitive nymph had been listening at the door during my conversation with her facetious master and the agreeable Mistress Honour. 



CHAPTER XLII. 

Stumble by chance upon a former acquaintance.—A fruitless attempt to regulate the morals of the vulgar.— My friend maltreated for his piety. — He preaches the doctrine of forbearance in the midst of affliction. 

I Sallied out of the house with a light and merry heart, and resolved, after I had discharged my lodging, to keep my appointment with Mr. Butler, whom I had promised to meet at the ordinary at dinner. 
I was humming over to myself a favourite tune of old Carolan, the Irish bard, when I observed a croud of people on the opposite side of the way; and, being willing to know the cause that had brought so motley a collection of beings together, I crossed the way, and found one half of the audience listening with great attention to the exhortations of a man who stood with his back towards me, and the other half indulging themselves in excessive laughter, seemingly at the expence of the apostle who addressed them, for I soon learned, from the tendency of his discourse, that it turned entirely upon religious topics; but how was I struck with astonishment, when the preacher turned round, and I discovered him to be the very identical man, who had given me such excellent admonitions, for my future conduct in life, but a few days before, in St. James's park, and who had left me in a great hurry to settle a political dispute that had arisen between him and another person. A recollection of the disagreeable effects of his elocution would have prompted me to retire from the scene immediately, for fear of a second part of the same tune; but I soon found this was impossible, for the major's eye had no sooner come into the line of direction with mine, than he burst through the croud, and shook me heartily with one hand, while he secured a young chimney-sweeper from escaping with the other; and, after asking me a thousand questions in the same breath, three-fourths of which I could not understand, from the impediments of his speech, he concluded his list of enquiries by desiring to know how I liked his book upon self-knowledge, and if I had read it over and over; and (heaven forgive me for uttering such a confounded lie) I told the good man, without hesitation, that I had perused it with great attention, and had no doubt but I should live the better, and become the happier, for being acquainted with its contents. This assurance put the good soldier in a rapture; and, turning to me, he pulled the young chimney-cleanser forward, and, presenting him to my view, —  Here, says he, this boy you now see I met this morning quarrelling with his companions; he was then extremely wicked, and swearing the most shocking and prophane oaths, and I thought it my duty, as a Christian, to reclaim them, if possible, and bring the stray sheep back to the Shepherd's fold; two of the three abused me for my endeavours, and even were so hardened as to throw stones at me; but I pitied the poor wretches, for their behaviour arose from the impulse of the devil, and not from themselves; when it pleases heaven that they should be reclaimed they will, but I fear their time is not come; as for this poor boy, whom they had beaten severely, I took him into a house in the neighbourhood, and had him washed and cleaned; and he has promised me to be a good child for the future, and never to swear; have not you, my boy?  cries the major, addressing himself to the young sweep. "Yes, sir," answers the other. "Aye," continues this worthy character; "and, because I found him of a good disposition, and not stubborn, I have given him six-pence to encourage him, and some books to teach him his duty, which I dare say he will attend to;— won't you, my lad?" says the major. Yes, sir," says the boy. "Come, read me that prayer aloud at the beginning of the book," cries the major. "I cannot read, your honour," says the boy. "That is a shame to your parents," replies the major; — "but," continues he, "if you cannot read, you can say your prayers, and be sure you do that every night and morning." "I will, your honour," says the boy, "if my master will give me leave." "That's a good child," replies the major: "your master must give you leave, or he will never prosper, either in this world or the next. Come, repeat this prayer after me," added the major. Here the good man made the boy rehearse a long invocation to the Deity, which the sooty understrapper seemed to do with wonderful unwillingness, while the croud, who was listening to this singular dialogue, were employed in ridiculing the pious labours of my friend, some by groans, and others by thrusting the tongue in one cheek, and looking very gravely with the other. But the whole group was soon dispersed by the arrival of the boy's master, who had been informed of his delay by another of his apprentices; and, heated with anger, he tore the young proselyte away from the embraces of the well-meaning reformer of manners, whom he honoured with the most opprobrious epithets for detaining his lawful apprentice from his duty; and, after beating the lad in a most unmerciful manner, he began to pelt my friend with the filth of the street without ceremony, in which agreeable pastime he was joined by the greater part of the mob; and, in spite of all my endeavours to the contrary, by an unlucky manoeuvre of the enemy, they fairly drove us from the field; for, just as the major, regardless of their shouts, was exercising his lungs, in a most vociferous and thundering tone, to bring them to a sense of their misconduct, and to put them in the path of righteousness, he received an untimely as well as unsavoury salute, from the foe, of a large handful of mud, which, striking him with great force exactly in the mouth, which he had opened, with great energy, as wide as a small oven, put a final period to my friend's elocution, by entirely stopping up that necessary aperture, and thereby rendering the organs of speech totally useless. In this discomfited state we retired into a house, but not before I had stripped to my skin to offer any of them battle; and probably I should have come off even worse than my military friend, if the major had not insisted that I should not use the arm of flesh to correct the evil machinations of the spirit, but act like a true adherent to the Christian faith in its primitive purity, and, when I received a blow on one cheek, calmly to present my enemy with the other. Though I admitted the major to be my superior in knowledge, it was with a great degree of difficulty that I could bring myself to follow his pacific notions under the pressure of such unparallelled insolence. — However, when we had cleaned ourselves from the dirt that disfigured us, in consequence of the unsavoury and ill-timed application of the mob, the major and I took our leave of each other, but not before he had expressed the utmost wishes to be of service to my affairs, and extorted a promise that I would punctually breakfast with him on the following morning. 



CHAPTER XLIII. 

Meet by accident with Count Dapper.—I resolve to be revenged for his impositions.—The method he took to disarm my anger.—An object of misery.—The count's idea of promiscuous charity.— An noble instance of his humanity. 

WHEN I had left my apostolic preceptor, I was ruminating upon some scheme to fill up my time till the hour of dinner; and, wandering by a bookseller's shop, I stopped to peruse some loose pamphlets that lay scattered on the window, when I observed a smart well-dressed man, ogling through his glass at some ladies that were crossing the way. It was not long before I recollected the very identical features of the facetious count, who had played so many pranks with my vanity at the expence of my purse. I stood for some time surveying him with great accuracy, that I might be certain of committing no mistake in the business; for he was so metamorphosed by his dress, that I should not readily have known him again, but for a peculiar smartness of air and cock of the hat that characterised all his movements. The moment that I was convinced he was my man, I walked up to him with a stern and determined manner, to claim not only the money he had so ingeniously borrowed of me, but likewise satisfaction for the injuries and shame I had experienced by his artful manoeuvres. 

When I had approached him, I gave him a hearty slap on the shoulder, which seemed to set his whole nervous system in commotion, an effect that did not so much proceed from the violence of the blow as the particular place to which it was applied. He turned immediately round, as I imagined to thank the person who had bestowed so great a mark of their esteem upon him; and, perceiving me, he exclaimed, with a smile, "Aye, aye, my dear fellow, is it you? — damme, it is well it is no worse; I thought it was some diabolical understrapper, deputed from the inchanted castles about Shire-lane to drag me into limbo at the desire of some vile unhallowed rascal of a tailor, who, not having the fear of decency before his eyes, had issued a writ, by the L—d, to abridge my privileges of action; but, damme, I have met with an agreeable surprise. Give me your hand, my gay fellow," continues the count; "you shall dine with me to-day up to your ears in clover. I know an excellent house; — beef-steaks and porter fit for a prince! — Besides there is the widow Lamb, a monstrous good-natured gentlewoman, who keeps a house of entertainment, for hungry gentlemen, in Oxford-road; I will introduce you to her acquaintance; damme, any thing to serve a friend. The captain is onboard the sloop," cries the count, slapping his thigh; "and, by the immortal powers, it shall be your own fault if you want for any thing." 

"I tell you what, Mr. Count," replied I with a serious air; "I must inform you that you have mistaken your man most egregiously. It is true, I have formerly suffered myself to be made a complete ass; but that is now over; and, what is more, sir, I insist upon immediate reparation." I would have proceeded farther, had he not stopped my harangue by indulging an excessive fit of laughter; at the conclusion of which he cried out, in disjointed sentences,—"Oh! damme, this is fine;— good,—very good, by Ch—t. Excuse my laughing, my dear friend," continued the beau; "but I can't avoid it; I can't, upon my soul. This is too much; but, damn it, you cannot be serious." "Yes, sir, but I am," replied I, and strutted up to him with my arms a-kimbo. "No, no, I know better," rejoins the count; "you are not serious, and, what is more, you do not intend to be serious." — Yes, but I do, sir," replied I. — Oh! no, you don't,' added he; why, zounds! man, if you were serious, I would not keep you company; I have a mortal aversion to serious men; and you must laugh now; come, I know you will, if it is only to oblige me." Whether it arose from my admiration of his impudence, or that the pleasantness of his features (for he had habitually a smile) attuned my heart to forgiveness and philanthropy, I cannot tell; but he certainly hit upon the only possible mode there was of disarming my resentment; and, before I had time to rally the daemons of revenge to my assistance, he took me under the arm, and, forcing me along the street, cocked his glass, and saluted every well-dressed man or woman we met, not one of whom, however, thought proper to return the compliment; and amused himself in this manner, without paying the most distant attention to me or my remonstrances. 
We had not walked very far before he gave me an instance of his possessing a goodness of heart that would have done honour to a bishop. A poor woman sat upon the cold stones, at the corner of an alley, with two children in her lap, soliciting charity from accidental passengers. Misery and hunger were strongly depicted in her face; the complexion of her poor infants was sicklied over with the pale hand of famine; and the tattered vestments, that barely served to cover one half of her body, and answer the rigid purposes of delicacy, were ragged, filthy, and unwholesome. In this woe-begone state did the silent mourner sit, for her tongue seemed to have lost the faculty of telling the sorrow that was so eloquently delivered from her eyes; and, with an extended arm, to receive the benevolent offerings of the good and worthy, she reclined, as one "pining in thought,

"With green and yellow melancholy, 
"And looked like Patience, 
"On a monument, smiling at grief." 


When this wretched spectacle first caught the count's attention, he pulled me by the arm, and pointing to the miserable group, broke forth in the following apostrophe: "There," said he,                    behold an instance of the boasted humanity of this nation. You see that unfortunate being, laden with almost as many afflictions as the vengeance of heaven can inflict upon a human creature as a punishment for the most complicated vices; and yet her situation, lamentable as it is, cannot touch the heart of one person in one hundred, that passes by, sufficiently to administer any thing to her relief. — The rich plebeian spurns at her necessities, because he can silence the appeals of pity in his bosom by being  forced  to contribute to the support of a parish-workhouse; the haughty and swollen ecclesiastic thinks it sufficient that he is  paid  for teaching others the beauties and advantages of charity, without being at the unnecessary trouble of practising it himself; and the prude, valuing herself upon the preservation of that chastity which never was besieged, instead of giving a piece of money for the relief of a sickly female, tosses her head, and wonders such harlots should be encouraged, by the ill-timed bounty of inconsiderate people, to live in idleness and get bastards. In this strain," continues the count, "do they comment upon the variegated miseries of such objects as these, when none of their remarks, it is highly probable, are founded either in charity or truth. — That poor woman," added he, "is the widow of a man of honour and understanding, whom I knew well. He came over from Ireland, a few years since, in the hope of mending his fortune; but, poor gentleman! he experienced a sad reverse; and, falling into misfortunes in a strange country, it speedily broke his heart, and he left that disconsolate woman pregnant with these children, who are twins. After the decease of her husband, she contrived to eke out a subsistence by the donations of her late husband's friends; — but, that precarious channel having long since been dried up, she is now obliged to beg her bread in the manner you behold, for the circumstance of her having drawn her first breath in our sister-kingdom entirely deprives her of receiving any benefit from a workhouse, and throws her upon the humanity of the public, whose general sentiments, in regard to such children of calamity as she is, I have painted to your imagination with, I am afraid, too accurate a pencil. 

Here the count pulled out his purse, and took a crown-piece from among a parcel of money, and, walking up to the object of his discourse, put it into her hand, which he squeezed with some fervour; and, calling upon God to bless her, left her, rather precipitately, to wonder at the benevolence of a dissipated man, whose heart, not being steeled by the rigorous laws of prudence, or influenced by her narrow, saving, selfish, doctrines, was tremblingly alive to the necessities of human nature. 
This noble behaviour of the count not only obliterated the remembrance of our former transactions, but raised him to such a pitch in my esteem, that I verily believe I would have encountered any hardship to have served a man of so exalted a way of thinking. 
From this scene we repaired to the ordinary, where I met my friend Butler, to whom I communicated my success at the register-office. After passing an afternoon in innocent merriment, I took my leave of these pleasant, but unthinking, companions; and found, on my attempt to pay my share of the reckoning, that the whole had been discharged by the count, who took this opportunity to repay me what he had borrowed, and offered me the loan of a guinea, which I refused, with many thanks for his good opinion of my principles. 
When I had disengaged myself from my friends, and asked pardon of the count for my unwarrantable behaviour, I made the best of my way to my lodging, where I advertised my landlady of my departure the next day; and, after putting every thing in readiness to enter upon my new post, I retired to bed, and enjoyed the most balmy and comfortable night's rest I had ever done since my arrival in Great-Britain. 



CHAPTER XLIV. 

I go to breakfast with Major Credulous.— Am surprised at meeting with an acquaintance. — My admiration of the major's virtues. — I repair to my new place. — Am struck with the beauty of my master's niece. 

AGREEABLE to my appointment with the major, I got up early, and dressed myself with as much neatness as possible, to answer two purposes: in the first place, to breakfast with my military friend; and in the second, to appear as decent as I could upon my entrance to my new situation. 
When I arrived at the major's lodgings, in the neighbourhood of St. James's, I was shewn up stairs by a decent orderly-looking woman, and found, on my entrance into the apartment, that several persons were attending there for the purpose of seeing the major: among the rest was a lady, whom I shrewdly suspected to be a  fille de joye;  a strange repulsive-looking man, in a rusty black coat, with a bushy wig, and a remarkable cast in his left eye, the sight of which was almost buried in his nose; and a decrepid old woman, who was almost bent double with the weight of age. While we sat there waiting for the major, several others came in; and, among the rest, I was astonished to recognise the face of Captain Blisset, the gentleman whom I formerly mentioned as having met in Westminster-abbey. His surprize at meeting me was to the full as great as mine. After congratulating me upon my happiness in being known to the major, he informed me, that he was the very gentleman to whose kindness both himself and his family had been so much indebted, and towards whom he had exercised such a diabolical spirit of rancour while on the same service in America. 
A farther discussion of the subject was now prevented by the major's entering the chamber. The moment he saw me, he ran up and embraced me, and I was presented to the company as a young man to whom he considered himself greatly indebted; then he related the history of our affair with the chimney-sweeper, and its disagreeable issue. — While the major was pronouncing this eulogium in my favour, the people in the room eyed me with great attention and respect; but particularly the captain, who seemed extremely delighted that I should have taken so active a part in defence of so worthy a character. 
The breakfast apparatus being all placed in order, we were summoned by our good host to the table, who made us follow him in his truly-laudable custom of kneeling down and repeating some prayers preparatory to our repast; in the performance of which, he shewed as much zeal for the honour of his Saviour, and respect for the canons of heaven, as e'er a ruby-faced pastor in the three kingdoms; but the most beautiful feature in the major's portrait, and in which he differed very materially from the reverend gentlemen in question, was, — that he constantly illustrated and enforced his precepts by his example. When that part of the morning duty was finished, he performed the honours of his table with the politeness of a gentleman and the hospitality of an Irishman, (for I understood, from his own declaration, that he was a native of that kingdom,) most assiduously endeavouring to render our situation as completely happy as possible; and his demeanour, so far from being soured by his religious attachments, was at once open, frank, chearful, and benevolent. 
When the breakfast was over, he gave audience to his visitors in an inner room, to which they all retired one by one, as the major signified his wishes. When they were all gone, the good man came into the room where I had remained, and apologised to me for his absence by making me acquainted with the leading features of their several characters, and the general intent of his conversation with them all; by which I found, that my conjectures relative to the young lady were true; that the old woman had formerly kept a house of ill fame in the neighbourhood of Covent-garden, but had been converted from a continuance of her meretricious practices by the major's exhortations, who found her in Bridewell beating hemp for the good of society; that the man with an oblique vision was formerly one of the greatest reprobates about town, but, being sent to the county-jail for debt, was enlarged by his creditors at the intercession of the major, who took upon himself a part of his pecuniary obligations, on a solemn promise, from the prisoner, that he would follow his counsels and purify his conduct in future. The major was now proceeding to a panegyric on the captain; but I interrupted his narrative by informing him of our conversation in the abbey. My friend frankly declaring, that his time was not his own, he having long since resigned it to the service of the public, I took that as a hint for my departure, and wished him a good morning, but not before he had embraced me in a most affectionate manner, and promised to remember me particularly in his prayers, which he should daily offer to the throne of mercy for my felicity; and, if prayers from so incorruptible a heart as his could not be effectual, I tremble for the authority of a prelate. 
I now hurried to my new place, and found every thing prepared for my reception in the family. I was soon given to understand, by my fellow-servant in the kitchen, that our family had been increased, since my departure, by Miss Jesse, my master's niece, who had returned home from her annual visit; and, by the favourable account I heard from Peggy, (for that was the name of the good-humoured wench in question,) I was enamoured with the young lady's character before I saw her person; but it was not long before I had an opportunity of being an eye-witness to those irresistible charms which had attracted my notice so much in the description. When the bell rang from above, I was ordered by the house-keeper to lay the cloth for dinner, a service I performed with such dexterity as procured me the approbation of Mrs. Honour. 

I was in the act of placing the last knife and fork, when the young lady entered the room; and, at the first glance I caught of her person, I was so transported with an undescribable emotion, that I stood for some minutes motionless and incapable of fulfilling my duty. I believe she perceived my confusion, and partly guessed at the cause; for she observed, by way of encouraging me, when her uncle came in to dinner, that I was a modest-looking young man, and seemed very attentive to my situation; but the pleasing effects of her gentle spirit were strongly counteracted by her uncle, who replied, with a contracted brow,  Aye, aye, niece, new brooms sweep clean; when I know him better, I'll tell you more of my mind.  This retort of my master's threw me into confusion; which the young lady perceiving, she gave me a smile, unperceived by her saturnine relation, which seemed to insinuate, that old people have their humours, which ought to be indulged on account of their age, but not regarded on the score of their folly. 




CHAPTER XLV.  


Become deeply in love with my master's niece.—Write a poem on my hopeless situation.— The singular event that followed it. — Am ordered to attend my charmer at Vauxhall-gardens. 

THE personal graces of Miss Jesse, added to the amiable complexion of her mind, had made such an indelible impression on my heart, that I became unhappy out of her sight. Indeed the idea of her charms was continually stepping between me and my peace, and I was ridiculous enough to sigh for the possession of that, which Fortune had placed infinitely beyond my reach. In this melancholy state I wandered about the house, sometimes like a being lost to himself, meditating upon a subject that was hourly preying on my spirits, without the most distant hope to bear me up against so much inquietude; but, so little are our inclinations within the government of our own power, that I am perfectly convinced we are frequently doomed to be involuntarily miserable. 
I had not been a fortnight in my new place before I had every reason to believe I had made a conquest of my fellow-servant, Peggy, whose attentions to me in every thing, accompanied by certain love-fraught smiles, left me no room to doubt about the the nature of her desires. But I was too much absorbed in reflecting upon the charms of the mistress to pay the least regard to the wiles and witcheries of the maid; and my passion for that divine creature became at last so troublesome, that my nights were sleepless and my days were wretched; she existed in my imagination when I was awake, and haunted my dreams when I wished for rest. I had resolved a hundred times, in the moments of madness, to throw myself at her feet, disclose my passion, and then quit her sight for ever; but the terrors, which hung about the last part of the resolution, constantly defeated the advantages of the first; and in this state of uncertainty and disquiet, I passed my melancholy hours, until my very existence became intolerable. 
One evening, having retired to my room, to indulge in secret the sorrows of my heart, I took up a pen, and diverted myself with writing the following verses:





The Lover's Complaint. 

MY plaints to my Jesse unknown, 
Unbless'd must I wander and sigh, 
While echo rehearses each moan, 
And sorrow distils from each eye. 


The nymph, I lament to have seen, 
Is gentle, complacent, and kind; 
The graces have fashion'd her mein, 
And wisdom illumines her mind. 


For her I have roses entwin'd, 
But dare not the chaplet reveal; 
For, though her soft spirit is kind, 
Her dignity freezes my zeal. 


By the aid of my lyre no more 
Shall accents of melody flow; 
Its tones must my passion deplore, 
And breathe but the measure of woe. 



Unheeded approaches the spring 
To open the blossoms of May; 
In vain does sweet Philomel sing, 
Or the flower-deck'd valley look gay. 


But cease thy emotions, fond heart; 
No longer or flutter or beat; 
For why should you pine with a smart 
The tongue is denied to repeat? 


The passions that wound my repose 
Will hasten the period of strife; 
For love like the phoenix has rose, 
And fed on the ashes of life. 


Then, since I must never impart 
Those feelings I'm doom'd to deplore, 
The pulses that govern my heart 
Shall throb with its transports no more. 



My pipe I have thrown on the ground, 
That was wont to beguile the sad hours: 
Ah me! all the magic of sound 
Is broke by superior pow'rs. 


How cruel is Fate, with such woes 
My ardour of youth to suppress! 
Say, why does she smile upon those 
Whom prudence forbids her to bless? 


Then go, lovely nymph, to the plain, 
And enslave all the shepherds you see: 
You may find a more affluent swain, 
But none that will love you like me: 


While I stray the willows among, 
Unconscious of peace or of rest; 
For hope, that gave strength to my song, 
Has deserted thy Corydon's breast. 







When I had finished this impassioned epistle, which I left carelessly on the table, I pursued the avocations of my duty with more alertness; and it should seem, that, by disburdening my brain of this poetical child, it had operated to reduce the poignancy of my grief, as the tears of a woman are said to relieve the heart when laden with the keenest sorrows. — But how was my joy rekindled, when, returning to my room, I found that my amorous sonnet had been perused by some fair incognita, who had even added fuel to my attachment, by annexing the following lines:

Though hope, like coquettes, often plays with the heart, 
To prove her seduction and skill, 
We all find it best to subscribe to her art, 
And obey the caprice of her will. 

Then cease, love-sick youth, to abandon her wiles 
Or yield up your mind to despair: 
Attend her suggestions and cherish her smiles, 
For she soon may extinguish your care. 

The state of perturbation, that this discovery threw me into, is easier to be conceived than described. Various were my conjectures relative to the person who had left this testimony of her concern, and my arrogance, at times, would hurry me so far as to ascribe it to the fair object of my desires; but my presumption had scarcely brought such an idea to my imagination before my reflection reassumed her power, corrected my vanity, and destroyed it. The impossibility of such a circumstance taking place left me bewildered in doubts and uncertainties; however, I was relieved from all farther conjectures, as to the author of the verses, on the following evening. 
Some young ladies and gentlemen having formed a party for Vauxhall-gardens, in which they had engaged my incomparable and charming Jesse to accompany them, I was ordered by my master to attend at the door of the gardens, at a particular hour, to wait upon her home. As this was a service I would have preferred to the honour of attending even royalty itself, and in which I chearfully could have spent my existence, I needed no monitor to spur me to my duty, but was ready at least two hours before the time appointed, waiting, at the grand avenue to the gardens, with the utmost anxiety, for a sight of her, whose presence would have cheared me even in the bosom of a wilderness. At length she approached, all charming as she was, and dressed with such an elegant neatness, that she appeared like another Venus attired with elegance at the toilet of the graces. It being determined, by her party, to return to town by water, as it was a remarkably fine night, I was dispatched to procure a boat in readiness against their arrival at the stairs; and I executed the commission so much to their entire satisfaction, that I had the superlative pleasure of hearing the company commend my assiduity and address to their fair companion. 
When they had all taken their seats under a temporary awning, to shield them from the unwholesome dews of the night, I entered the boat, and sat behind the watermen. Their company consisted of my mistress and two other ladies, an officer in the guards, and a young attorney from the Temple. In this manner we proceeded down the Thames, the party taking it by turns to beguile the time with songs, and relate tales of mirth, for the mutual entertainment of each other. But we had not passed beyond the arches of Westminster bridge above a hundred yards, before an accident took place, that proved fatal to one of the party, and had nearly involved us all in one general destruction. 



CHAPTER XLVI. 

An accident happens that threatens us with imminent danger. — A bait for the devil. — My mistress makes a declaration of love in my favour.—My master dies. — I marry the object of my desires. — The infallible secret to insure conjugal felicity. 

THE moon, which had shone with such unusual brightness on our first setting out, was almost totally eclipsed by a cloud ere we had performed one half of our voyage, and rendered the objects on the Thames so indistinct, that our watermen, not looking about them with that caution their duty required, ran against a coal-barge which was moored at a small distance from Surry-stairs. The violence of the shock, added to the sudden bustle of the ladies, who all started up instantaneously on the first notice of danger, overturned the boat, notwithstanding all the efforts of the gentlemen to the contrary. Being a good swimmer, I immediately caught hold of my angelic mistress by the arm, but not before her whole body had been immerged in the water, and bore her, in that situation, senseless, to the shore. By the assistance of the watermen, the two ladies, her companions, were saved, and the officer swam to a parcel of timber, that floated conveniently in the neighbourhood of the place where the disaster happened. By this time, the shrieks of the ladies had drawn several people to the water-side, who exercised every office of humanity in their power. As for the ill-fated limb of the law, though he was heard to call for assistance in such piteous accents as would have melted a heart of stone, no one could be prevailed upon to go to his relief, until a young man, who was present, stripped himself in a trice to swim to the aid of the unfortunate beau; — and was just preparing to plunge into the stream, when one of the company happened to mention the name of his profession, which operated like a charm on the disposition of the humane youth, who no sooner understood that he was an attorney, than he very deliberately put on his clothes, protesting that, as he was a lawyer, he might drown and be damned for him; that, for his part, he would not run the chance of incurring the displeasure of the devil, by so untimely robbing him of his dues. 
When the fair Jesse had recovered the use of her senses, she eagerly enquired for her deliverer; and, finding that she was indebted for her life to my zeal and activity, she clasped her dear arms about my neck, and prayed that she might have the ability to express her gratitude. I was so overpowered by her condescension, that I remained speechless, kneeling at her feet, till, my passion getting the better of my reason, I seized her hand, and smothered it with kisses. By the gentle manner, in which she rebuked me for this freedom, I first discovered that I was not indifferent to her heart; which probably I should have remained ignorant of as long as I lived, if the decrees of Fate had not turned this seeming evil to my good.— When we returned home, she made me a present of a locket, which she intreated me to keep for ever, as a token of her gratitude and esteem; a present, to me of the most inestimable value, for it contained a ringlet of her lovely auburn hair, woven in the shape of a true-lover's knot. On receiving this mark of her favour, I threw myself at her feet, and, imploring her pardon for my presumption, made a full declaration of my passion. After this confession, I would have retired from her sight, and left the house for ever; but, perceiving my intention, she called me back, and told me, while her beauteous cheek glowed with a suffusion of blushes, that my partiality in her favour had not been a mystery to her for some time; that she could trace it in all my actions, and read it in all my looks: "But," added the divine Jesse,  I strove to avoid such observations as much as possible; for, in spite of the distance that fortune has thrown between us, I felt an advocate, that pleaded in behalf of your merits, in this breast, so powerfully, that I was obliged to yield to its solicitations; and must inform you, however painful to my delicacy, that my happiness cannot be more essential to your peace than yours is to mine.  Here the accomplished lady turned aside her head to hide her confusion, while I poured forth my acknowledgements at her feet in terms of the most rapturous gratitude. In short, we made a full confession of our regards for each other, and resolved to embrace the first opportunity, that Fortune should offer and Prudence should countenance, to make our bliss complete. And it was not long before that happened; for, her uncle being suddenly seized with the gout in his stomach, it carried him off, with the assistance of three physicians, in a few hours; and we had the pleasure to find, that he had left the greater part of his fortune at the sole disposal of his niece. 
When the customary time had elapsed, that is prescribed for people apparently to mourn for the loss of those, whose deaths they had hourly prayed for, my Jesse and I were led to the sacred altar of Hymen; and there, performing all due rites and ceremonies, the beauteous maid was given up to my possession; and I may venture to add, that, if every wedded pair experienced as much felicity as we have done since the mysterious and indissoluble knot made us one, the honourable state of matrimony would no longer furnish food for the pen of satire, or laughter for the faculties of folly, by the ridiculous feuds it too frequently engenders; and, gentle reader, to give you a convincing proof that I have a proper regard for the well-being of my fellow-creatures, I will publicly make known the inestimable secret, by the observance of which we are so much happier than our neighbours: it is briefly this, — looking with an eye of kindness upon the weaknesses of each other. 

FINIS. 

