William Carleton
THE LOUGH DERG PILGRIM.


In describing the habits, superstitions, and feelings of the Irish
people, it would be impossible to overlook a place which occupies
so prominent a position in their religious usages as the celebrated
Purgatory of St. Patrick, situated in a lake that lies among the bleak
and desolate looking mountains of Donegal.

It may also be necessary to state to the reader, that the following
sketch, though appearing in this place, was the first production from my
pen which ever came before the public. The occasion of its being written
was this:--I had been asked to breakfast by the late Rev. Caesar Otway,
some time I think in the winter of 1829. About that time, or a little
before, he had brought out his admirable work called, “Sketches in
Ireland, descriptive of interesting portions of Donegal, Cork, and
Kerry." Among the remarkable localities of Donegal, of course it was
natural to suppose, that “Lough Derg," or the celebrated “Purgatory
of St. Patrick," would not be omitted. Neither was it; and nothing
can exceed the accuracy and truthful vigor with which he describes its
situation and appearance. In the course of conversation, however, I
discovered that he had never been present during the season of making
the Pilgrimages, and was consequently ignorant of the religious
ceremonies which take place in it. In consequence, I gave him a pretty
full and accurate account I of them, and of the Station which I myself
had made there. After I had concluded, he requested me to put what I had
told him upon paper, adding, “I will dress it up and have it inserted in
the next edition."

I accordingly went home, and on the fourth evening afterwards brought
him the Sketch of the Lough Derg Pilgrim as it now appears, with the
exception of some offensive passages which are expunged in this edition.
Such was my first introduction to literary life.

And here I cannot omit paying my sincere tribute of grateful
recollection to a man from whom I have received so many acts of the
warmest kindness. To me he was a true friend in every sense of the word.
In my early trials his purse and his advice often supported, soothed,
and improved me. In a literary point of view I am under the deepest
obligations to his excellent judgment and good taste. Indeed were it
not for him, I never could have struggled my way through the severe
difficulties with which in my early career I was beset.

     “Green be the turf above thee,
     Friend of my early days;
     None knew thee but to love thee,
     Or named thee but to praise."

But to my theme, which will be better understood, as will my description
of the wild rites performed on the shores of its most celebrated island,
by the following extracts, taken from this able and most vivid describer
of Irish scenery:

“The road from the village of Petigo leading towards Lough Derg, runs
along a river tumbling over rocks; and then after proceeding for a time
over a boggy valley, you ascend into a dreary and mountainous tract,
extremely ugly in itself, but from which you have a fine view indeed
of the greatest part of the lower lake of Lough Erne, with its
many elevated islands, and all its hilly shores, green, wooded,
and cultivated, with the interspersed houses of its gentry, and
the comfortable cottages of its yeomanry--the finest yeomanry in
Ireland--men living in comparative comfort, and having in their figures
and bearing that elevation of character which a sense of loyalty and
independence confers. I had at length, after traveling about three
miles, arrived where the road was discontinued, and by the direction of
my guide, ascended a mountain-path that brought me through a wretched
village, and led to the top of a hill. Here my boy left me, and went
to look for the man who was to ferry us to Purgatory, and on the ridge
where I stood I had leisure to look around. To the south-west lay Lough
Erne, with all its isles and cultivated shores; to the north-west lay
Lough Derg, and truly never did I mark such a contrast. Lough Derg under
my feet--the lake, the shores, the mountains, the accompaniments of all
sorts presented the very landscape of desolation; its waters expanding
in their highland solitude, amidst a wide waste of moors, without one
green spot to refresh the eye, without a house or tree--all mournful in
the brown hue of its far-stretching bogs, and the gray uniformity of its
rocks; the surrounding mountains even partook of the sombre character
of the place; their forms without grandeur, their ranges continuous and
without elevation. The lake itself was certainly as fine as rocky shores
and numerous islands could make it: but it was encompassed with such
dreariness; it was deformed so much by its purgatorial island; the
associations connected with it were of such a degrading character,
that really the whole prospect before me struck my mind with a sense of
painfulness, and I said to myself, 'I am already in Purgatory.' A person
who has never seen the picture that was now under my eye, who had read
of a place consecrated by the devotion of ages, towards which the tide
of human superstition had flowed for twelve centuries, might imagine
that St. Patrick's Purgatory, secluded in its sacred island, would have
all the venerable and gothic accompaniments of olden time; and its ivied
towers and belfried steeples, its carved windows, and cloistered arches,
its long dark aisles and fretted vaults would have risen out of the
water, rivalling Iona or Lindisfarn; but nothing of the sort was to be
seen. The island, about half a mile from the shore, presented nothing
but a collection of hideous slated houses and cabins, which gave you
an idea that they were rather erected for the purpose of tollhouses or
police-stations than any thing else.

“I was certainly in an interesting position. I looked southerly towards
Lough Erne, with the Protestant city of Enniskillen rising amidst its
waters, like the island queen of all the loyalty, and industry, and
reasonable worship that have made her sons the admiration of past
and present time; and before me, to the north, Lough Derg, with its
far-famed isle, reposing there as the monstrous birth of a dreary and
degraded superstition, the enemy of mental cultivation, and destined to
keep the human understanding in the same dark unproductive state as the
moorland waste that lay outstretched around. I was soon joined by my
guide and by two men carrying oars, with whom I descended from the ridge
on which I was perched, towards the shores of the lake, where there
was a sort of boat, or rather toll-house, at which the pilgrims paid a
certain sum before they were permitted to embark for the island. In a
few minutes we were afloat; and while sitting in the boat I had time to
observe my ferrymen: one was a stupid countryman, who did not speak;
the other was an old man with a Woollen night-cap under his hat, a
brown snuff-colored coat, a nose begrimed with snuff, a small gray eye
enveloped amidst wrinkles that spread towards his temples in the form of
birds' claws, and gave to his countenance a sort of leering cunning
that was extremely disagreeable. I found he was the clerk of the island
chapel; that he was a sort of master of the ceremonies in purgatory, and
guardian and keeper of it when the station time was over and priests and
pilgrims had deserted it. I could plainly perceive that he had smoked me
out as a Protestant, that he was on his guard against me as a spy,
and that his determination was to get as much and to give as little
information as he could; in fact, he seemed to have the desire to obtain
the small sum he expected from me with as little exposure of his cause,
and as little explanation of the practices of his craft as possible.
The man informed me that the station time was over about a month, and he
confirmed my guide's remark that the Pope's jubilee had much diminished
the resort of pilgrims during the present season. He informed me also
that the whole district around the lough, together with all its islands,
belonged to Colonel L------, a relation of the Duke of Wellington; and
that this gentleman, as landlord, had leased the ferry of the island to
certain persons who had contracted to pay him L260 a year; and to make
up this sum, and obtain a suitable income for themselves, the ferrymen
charged each pilgrim five pence. Therefore, supposing that the
contractors make cent, per cent, by their contract, which it may be
supposed they do, the number of pilgrims to this island may be estimated
at 13,000; and, as my little guide afterwards told me (although the
cunning old clerk took care to avoid it), that each pilgrim paid the
priest from 1s. 8d. to 2s. 6d., therefore we may suppose that the profit
to the prior of Lough Derg and his priests was no small sum.

“In a short time I arrived at the island, and as stepping out of the
boat I planted my foot on the rocks of this scene of human absurdity,
I felt ashamed for human nature, and looked on myself as one of the
millions of fools that have, century after century, degraded their
understandings by coming hither. The island I found to be of an oval
shape.

“The buildings on it consisted of a slated house for the priests, two
chapels, and a long range of cabins on the rocky surface of the island,
which may contain about half an acre; there were also certain round
walls about two feet high, enclosing broken stone and wooden crosses;
these were called saints' beds, and around these circles, on the sharp
and stony rocks, the pilgrims go on their naked knees. Altogether I
may briefly sum up my view of this place, and say that it was filthy,
dreary, and altogether detestable--it was a positive waste of time to
visit it, and I hope I shall never behold it again." *

     * Fire at Lough Derg.--On the 15th Aug 1842, the
     station at this celebrated place was brought to a
     conclusion; but in the course of the night it was
     discovered that some of the houses were on fire, and
     four dwellings which, we believe, were recently
     erected, were altogether consumed. The people of the
     neighboring country directed their efforts chiefly to
     the preservation of the prior's house, which adjoined
     those in flames, and by pouring a continued supply of
     water against its windows, succeeded in saving it. The
     night being calm, and the wind in a favorable
     direction, the injury sustained was less than must have
     existed under different circumstances. The houses burnt
     were occupied as lodgings for pilgrims when on station.

The following is extracted from Bishop Henry Jones's account, published
in 1647:

“The island called St. Patrick's Purgatory is altogether rocky, and
rather level; within the compass of the island, in the water towards
the north-east, about two yards from the shore, stand certain rocks, the
least of which, and next the shore, is the one St. Patrick knelt on for
the third part of the night in prayer, he did another third in his cell,
which is called his bed, and another third in the cave or purgatory; in
this stone there is a cleft or print, said to be made by St. Patrick's
knees; the other stone is much greater and further off in the lake,
and covered with water, called Lachavanny: this is esteemed of singular
virtue; standing thereon healeth pilgrims' feet, bleeding as they are
with cuts and bruises got in going barefoot round the blessed beds.

“The entrance into the island is narrow and rocky; these rocks they
report to be the guts of a great serpent metamorphosed into stones.
When Mr. Copinger, a gentleman drawn thither by the fame of the place,
visited it, there was a church covered with shingles dedicated to St.
Patrick, and it was thus furnished: at the east end was a high altar
covered with linen, over which did hang the image of our Lady with our
Saviour in her arms; on the right did hang the picture of the three
kings offering their presents to our Saviour; and on the left the
picture of our Saviour on the cross; near the altar, and on the south
side, did stand on the ground an old worm-eaten image of St. Patrick;
and behind the altar was another of the same fabric, but still older
in appearance, called. St Arioge; and on the right hand another image
called St. Volusianus.

“Between the church and the cave there is a small rising ground, and on
a heap of stones lay a little stone cross, part broken, part standing;
and. in the east of the church was another cross made of twigs
interwoven: 'this is known by the name of St. Patrick's altar, on which
lie three pieces of a bell, which they say St. Patrick used to carry
in, his hand. Here also was laid a certain knotty bone of some bigness,
hollow in the midst like the nave of a wheel, and out of which issue,
as it were, natural spokes: this was: shown as a great rarity, being
part of a great, serpent's tail--one of those monsters the blessed
Patrick expelled out of Ireland.

“Towards the narrowest part of the island were six circles--some call
them saints' beds, or beds of penance. Pilgrims are continually praying
and kneeling about these beds; and they are compassed around with
sharp stones and difficult passages for the accommodation of such as go
barefooted.

“In the farthest part northward of the island, are certain beds of stone
cast together; as memorials for some that are elsewhere; buried; but
who trust to the prayers and merits of those who daily resort to this
Purgatory. Lastly, in this island are several Irish cabins covered with
thatch, and another for shriving or confession; and there are: separate
places assigned for those who come from the four provinces of Ireland.

“In all, the pilgrims remain on the island nine days; they eat but once
in the twenty-four hours, of oatmeal and water. They have liberty to
refresh themselves with the water of the lake, which, as Roth says, 'is
of such virtue, that though thou shouldst fill thyself with it, yet
will it not offend; but is as if it flowed from some mineral.'

“The pilgrims at night lodge or lie on straw, without pillow or pallet,
rolling themselves in their mantles, and wrapping their heads in their
breeches; only on some one of the eight nights they must lie on one of
the saints' beds, whichever they like."

          *     *     *     *     *

I was, at the time of performing this station, in the middle of
my nineteenth year--of quick perception--warm imagination--a mind
peculiarly romantic--a morbid turn for devotion, and a candidate for the
priesthood, having been made slightly acquainted with Latin, and more
slightly still with Greek.

At this period, however, all my faculties merged like friendly streams
into the large current of my devotion. Of religion I was completely
ignorant, although I had sustained a very conspicuous part in the
devotions of the family, and signalized myself frequently; by taking
the lead in a rosary. I had often out-prayed and out-fasted an old
circulating pilgrim, who occasionally visited our family; a feat on
which few would have ventured; and I even arrived to such a pitch of
perfection at praying, that with the assistance of young and powerful
lungs, I was fully able to distance him at any English prayer in which
we joined. But in Latin, I must allow, that owing to my imperfect
knowledge of its pronunciation, and to some twitches of conscience I
felt on adventuring to imitate, him by overleaping this impediment, he
was able to throw me back a considerable distance in his turn; so that
when we both started for a De Profundis, I was always sure to come
in second. Owing to all this I was considered a young man of promise,
being, moreover, as my master often told my father, a youth of
prodigious parts and great cuteness. Indeed, on this subject my master's
veracity could not be questioned; because when I first commenced Latin,
I was often heard repeating the prescribed tasks in my sleep. Many of
his relations had already, even upon the strength of my prospective
priesthood, begun to claim relationship with our family, and before I
was nineteen, I found myself godfather to a dozen godsons and as many
god-daughters; every one of whom I had with unusual condescension
taken under my patronage; and most of the boys were named after myself.
Finding that I was thus responsible for so much, in the opinion of my
friends, and having the aforesaid character of piety to sustain, I found
it indispensable to make the pilgrimage. Not that I considered myself a
sinner, or by any means bound to go from that motive, for although the
opinion of my friends, as to my talents and sanctity, was exceedingly
high, yet, I assure you, it cut but a very indifferent figure, when
compared with my own on both these subjects.

I very well remember that the first sly attempt I ever made at a miracle
was in reference to Lough Derg; I tried it by way of preparation for
my pilgrimage. I heard that there had been a boat lost there, about the
year 1796, and that a certain priest who was in her as a passenger, had
walked very calmly across the lake to the island, after the bout and the
rest of the passengers in her had all gone to the bottom. Now, I had,
from my childhood, a particular prejudice against sailing in a boat,
although Dick Darcy, a satirical and heathenish old bachelor, who never
went to Mass, used often to tell me, with a grin which I was never able
rightly to understand, that I might have no prejudice against sailing,
“because," Dick would say, “take my word for it, you'll never die by
drowning." At all events, I thought to myself, that should any such
untoward accident occur to me, it would be no unpleasant circumstance
to imitate the priest; but that it would be infinitely more agreeable
to make the first experiment in a marl-pit, on my father's farm, than
on the lake. Accordingly, after three days' fasting, and praying for the
power of not sinking in the water, I slipped very quietly down to the
pit, and after reconnoitering the premises, to be sure there was no
looker-on, I approached the brink. At this moment my heart beat high
with emotion, my soul was wrapt up to a most enthusiastic pitch
of faith, and my whole spirit absorbed in feelings, where
hope--doubt--gleams of uncertainty--visions of future eminence--twitches
of fear--reflections on my expertness in swimming--on the success of the
water-walking priest afore-mentioned--and on the depth of the pond--had
all insisted on an equal share of attention. At the edge of the pit grew
large water-lilies, with their leaves spread over the surface; it is
singular to reflect upon what slight and ridiculous circumstances
the mind will seize, when wound up in this manner to a pitch of
superstitious absurdity. I am really ashamed, even whilst writing this,
of the confidence I put for a moment in a treacherous water-lily, as its
leaf lay spread so smoothly and broadly over the surface of the pond, as
if to lure my foot to the experiment. However, after having stimulated
myself by a fresh pater and ave, I advanced, my eyes turned up
enthusiastically to heaven--my hands resolutely clenched--my
teeth locked together--my nerves set--and my whole soul strong in
confidence--I advanced, I say, and lest I might give myself time to cool
from this divine glow, I made a tremendous stride, planting my right
foot exactly in the middle of the treacherous water-lily leaf, and
the next moment was up to the neck in water. Here was devotion cooled.
Happily I was able to bottom the pool, or could swim very well, if
necessary; so I had not much difficulty in getting out. As soon as I
found myself on the bank, I waited not to make reflections, but with a
rueful face set off at full speed for my father's house, which was not
far distant; the water all the while whizzing out of nay clothes, by
the rapidity of the motion, as it does from a water-spaniel after having
been in that element. It is singular to think what a strong authority
vanity has over the principles and passions in the weakest and strongest
moments of both; I never was remarkable, at that open, ingenuous period
of my life, for secrecy; yet did I now take especial care not to invest
either this attempt at the miraculous, or its concomitant failure, with
anything like narration. It was, however, an act of devotion that had
a vile effect on my lungs, for it gave me a cough that was intolerable;
and I never felt the infirmities of humanity more than in this ludicrous
attempt to get beyond them; in which, by the way, I was nearer being
successful than I had intended, though in a different sense. This
happened a month before I started for Lough Derg.

It was about six o'clock of a delightful morning in the pleasant month
of July, when I set out upon my pilgrimage, with a single change of
linen in my pocket, and a pair of discarded shoes upon my bare feet;
for, in compliance with the general rule, I wore no stockings. The sun
looked down upon all nature with great good humor; everything smiled
around me; and as I passed for a few miles across an upland country
which stretched down from a chain of dark rugged mountains that lay
westward, I could not help feeling, although the feeling was indeed
checked--that the scene was exhilarating. The rough upland was in
several places diversified with green spots of cultivated land, with
some wood, consisting of an old venerable plantation of mountain pine,
that hung on the convex sweep of a large knoll away to my right,--with
a broad sheet of lake that curled to the fresh arrowy breeze of morning,
on which a variety of water-fowl were flapping their wings or skimming
along, leaving a troubled track on the peaceful waters behind them;
there were also deep intersections of precipitous or sloping glens,
graced with hazel, holly, and every description of copse-wood. On other
occasions I have drunk deeply of pleasure, when in the midst of this
scenery, bearing about me the young, free, and bounding spirit, its
first edge of enjoyment unblunted by the collision of base minds and
stony hearts, against which experience jostles us in maturer life.

The dew hung shining upon the leaves, and fell in pattering showers
from the trees, as a bird, alarmed at my approach, would spring from the
branch and leave it vibrating in the air behind her; the early challenge
of the cock grouse, and the quick-go-quick of the quail, were
cheerfully uttered on all sides. The rapid martins twittered with
peculiar glee, or, in the light caprice of their mirth, placed
themselves for a moment upon the edge of a scaur, or earthly precipice,
in which their nests were built, and then shot up again to mingle with
the careering and joyful flock that cut the air in every direction.
Where is the heart which could not enjoy such a morning scene? Under any
other circumstances it would have enchanted me; but here, in fact,
that intensity of spirit which is necessary to the due contemplation of
beautiful prospects, was transferred to a gloomier object. I was under
the influence of a feeling quite new to me. It was not pleasure, nor was
it pain, but a chilliness of soul which proceeded from the gloomy and
severe task that I had undertaken--a task which, when I considered the
danger and the advantages annexed to its performance, was sufficient to
abstract me from every other object. It was really the first exercise
of that jealous spirit of mistaken devotion which keeps the soul in
perpetual sickness, and invests the innocent enjoyments of life with
a character of sin and severity. It was this gloomy feeling that could
alone have strangled in their birth those sensations which the wisdom
of God has given as a security in some degree against sin, by opening
to the heart of man sources of pleasure, for which the soul is not
compelled to barter away her innocence, as in those of a grosser nature.
I may be wrong in analyzing the sensation, but for the first time in my
life I felt anxious and unhappy; yet, according to my own opinions, I
should have been otherwise. I was startled at what I experienced, and
began to consider it as a secret intimation that I had chosen a wrong
time for my journey. I even felt as if it would not prosper--as if some
accident or misfortune would befall me ere my return. The boat might
sink, as in 1796: this was quite alarming. The miraculous experiment
on the pond here occurred to me with full force, and came before my
imagination in a new point of view. The drenching I got had a deep
and fearful meaning. It was ominous--it was prophetic,--and sent by a
merciful Providence to deter me from attending the pilgrimage at this
peculiar time--perhaps on this particular day: to-morrow the spell might
be broken, the danger past, and the difference of a single day could be
nothing. Just at this moment an unlucky hare, starting from an adjoining
thicket, scudded across my path, as if to fill up the measure of these
ominous predictions. I paused, and my foot was on the very turn to the
rightabout, when instantly a thought struck me which produced a reaction
in my imagination. Might not all this be the temptation of the devil,
suggested to prevent me from performing this blessed work? not the hare
itself be some------? In short, the counter-current carried me with
it. I had commenced my journey, and every one knows that when a man
commences a journey it is unlucky to turn back. On I went, but still
with a subdued and melancholy tone of feeling. If I met a cheerful
countryman, his mirth found no kindred spirit in me: on the contrary,
my taciturnity seemed to infect him; for, after several ineffectual'
attempts at conversation, he gradually became silent, or hummed a tune
to himself, and, on parting, bade me a short, doubtful kind of good day,
looking over his shoulder, as he departed, with a face of scrutiny and
surprise.

After getting five or six miles across the country, I came out on one
of these by-roads which run independently of all advantages of locality,
“up hill and down dale," from one little obscure village to another.
These roads are generally paved with round broad stones, laid curiously
together in longitudinal rows like the buttons on a schoolboy's jacket;
Owing to the infrequency of travellers on them, they are quite overgrown
with grass, except in one stripe along the middle, which is kept naked
by the hoofs of horses and the tread of foot passengers. There is some
tradition connected with these roads, or the manner of their formation,
which I do not remember.

At last I came out upon the main road; and you will be pleased to
imagine to yourself the figure of a tall, gaunt, gawkish young man,
dressed in a good suit of black cloth, with shirt and cravat like snow,
striding solemnly along, without shoe or stocking; for about this time I
was twelve miles from home, and blisters had already risen upon my feet,
in consequence of the dew having got into my shoes, which at the best
were enough to cut up any man; I had therefore to strip and carry my
shoes--one in my pocket, and another stuffed in my hat; being thus with
great reluctance compelled to travel barefoot: yet I soon turned even
this to account, when I reflected that it would enhance the merit of
my pilgrimage, and that every fresh blister would bring down a fresh
blessing. 'Tis true I was nettled to the soul, on perceiving the face
of a laborer on the way-side, or of a traveller who met me, gradually
expanding into a broad sarcastic grin, as such an unaccountable figure
passed him. But these I soon began to suspect were Protestant grins;
for none but heretics would presume by any means to give me a sneer. The
Catholics taking me for a priest, were sure to doff their hats to me; or
if they wore none, as is not unfrequent when at labor, they would catch
their forelocks with their finger and thumb, and bob down their heads
in the act of veneration. This attention of my brethren more than
compensated for the mirth of all other sects; in fact, their mistaking
me for a priest began to give me a good opinion of myself, and perfectly
reconciled me to the fatiguing severity of the journey.

I have had occasion to remark, while upon this pilgrimage, or rather
long afterwards,--for I was but little versed then in the science of
reflection--that it is impossible to calculate upon the capabilities
of either body or mind, until they are drawn out by some occasion of
peculiar interest, in which those of either or both are thrown upon
their own energies and resources. In my opinion, the great secret or
the directing principle of all enterprise rests in the motive of action;
for, whenever a suitable interest can be given to the principles of
human conduct, the person bound by, and feeling that interest will not
only perform as much as could possibly be expected from his natural
powers, but he will recruit his energies by drawing in all the
adventitious aid which the various relations of that interest, as they
extend to other objects, are capable of affording him. It was amazing,
for instance, to observe the vigor and perseverance with which feeble,
sickly old creatures, performed the necessary austerities of this
dreadful pilgrimage;--creatures, who if put to the same fatigue, on any
other business, would at once sink under it; but the motive supplied
energy, and the infirmities of nature borrowed new strength from the
deep and ardent devotion of the spirit.

The first that I suspected of being fellow pilgrims were two women whom
I overtook upon the way. They were dressed in gray cloaks, striped red
and blue petticoats; drugget, or linseywoolsey gowns, that came within
about three inches of their ankles. Each had a small white bag slung at
her back, which contained the scanty provisions for the journey, and the
oaten cakes, crisp and hard-baked, for the pilgrimage to the lake. The
hoods of their cloaks fell down their backs, and each dame had a spotted
cotton kerchief pinned around her dowd cap at the chin, whilst the
remainder of it fell down the shoulders, over the cloaks. Each had also
a staff in her hand, which she held in a manner peculiar to a travelling
woman--that is, with her hand round the upper end of it, her right thumb
extended across its head, and her arm, from the elbow down, parallel
with the horizon. The form of each, owing to the want of that spinal
strength and vigor which characterize the erect gait of man, was bent a
little forward, and this, joined to the idea produced by the nature
of their journey, gave to them something of an ardent and devoted
character, such as the mind and eye would seek for in a pilgrim, I saw
them at some distance before me, and knew by the staves and white bags
behind them that they were bound for Lough Derg. I accordingly stretched
out a little that I might overtake them; for in consequence of the
absorbing nature of my own reflections, my journey had only been a
solitary one, and I felt that society would relieve me. I was not a
little surprised, however, on finding that as soon as I topped one
height of the road, I was sure to find my two old ladies a competent
distance before me in the hollow (most of the northern roads are of this
nature), and that when I got to the bottom, I was as sure to perceive
their heads topping the next hill, and then gradually sinking out of
my sight. I was surprised at this, and perhaps a little nettled, that a
fresh active young fellow should not have sufficient mettle readily to
overtake two women. I did stretch out, therefore, with some vigor, yet
it was not till after a chase of two miles or so that I found myself
abreast of them. As soon as they noticed me they dropped a curtesy each,
addressing me at the same time as a clergyman, and I returned their
salutation with all due gravity. Upon my inquiring how far they had
travelled that day, it appeared that they had actually performed a
journey seven miles longer than mine: “We needn't ax your Reverence if
you're for the Islan'?" said one of them. “I am," I replied, not caring
to undeceive her as to my Reverentiality.

The truth was, in the midst of all my sanctity I felt proud of the old
woman's mistake as to my priesthood, and really had not so much ready
virtue about me, on the occasion, as was sufficient to undeceive her.
I was even thankful to her for the inquiry, and thought, on a
closer inspection, I perceived an uncommon portion of good sense and
intelligence in her face. “My very excellent, worthy woman," said I,
“how is it that you are able to travel at such a rate, when one would
suppose you should be fatigued by this time, after so long a journey?"

“Musha?" said she, “but your Reverence ought to know that."--I felt
puzzled at this: “How should I know it?" said I.

“I'm sure," she continued, “you couldn't expect a poor ould crathur o'
sixty to travel at this rate, at all at all; except for raisons, your
Reverence:"--looking towards me quite confidently and knowingly. This
was still more oracular, and I felt very odd under it; my character for
devotion was at stake, and I feared that the old lady was drawing me
into a kind of vicious circle. “Your Reverence knows, that for the likes
o' me, that can hardly move to the market of a Saturday, Lord help me!
an' home agin, for to travel at this rate, would be impossible, any
how, except," she added, “for what I'm carryin', sir, blessed be God for
it!"--peering at me again with more knowing and triumphant look.

“Why that's true," said I, thoughtfully; and then, assuming a bit of
the sacerdotal privilege, and suddenly raising my voice, though I was as
innocent as the child unborn of her meaning,--“that's true; but now
as you appear to be a sensible, pious woman, I hope you-understand the
nature of what you are carrying--and in a proper manner, too, for you
know that's the chief point."

“Why, Father dear, I do my best, avourneen; an' I ought of a sartinty to
know it, bekase blessed Friar Hagan spent three dys instructin' Mat and
myself in it; an' more betoken, that Mat sent him a sack o' phaties,
an' a bag of oats for his trouble, not forgettin' the goose he got
from myself, the Micklemas afther.--Arrah how long is that ago, Katty
a-haygur?" said she, addressing her companion.

“Ten years," said Katty. “Oh! it's more, I'm thinkin'; it's ten years
since poor Dick, God rest his sowl, died, and this was full two years
afore that: but no matther, agra, I'll let your Reverence hear the
prayer, at any rate." She here repeated a beautiful Irish prayer to the
Blessed Virgin, of which that beginning with “Hail, holy Queen!" in the
Roman Catholic prayer-books is a translation, or perhaps the original.
While she was repeating the prayer, I observed her hand in her bosom,
apparently extricating something, which, on being brought out, proved
to be a scapular; she held it up, that I might see it: “Your Reverence,"
 said she, “this is the ninth journey of the kind I made: but you don't
wonder now, I bleeve, how stoutly I'm able to stump it."

“You really do stump it stoutly, as you' say," I replied.

“Ay," said she, “an' not a wan' o' me but's as weak as a cat, at home
scarce can put a hand to any thing; but then, your Reverence, my eldest
daughter, Ellish, jist minds the house, an' lots the ould mother mind
the prayers, as I'm not able to do a hand's turn, worth namin'."

“But you appear to be stout and healthy," I observed, “if a person may
judge by your looks."

“Glory be to them that giv it to me then! that I am at the present time,
padre dheelish. But don't you know I'm always so durin' this journey;
I've a wicket heart-burn that torments the very life out o' me, all the
year round till this; and what 'ud your Reverence think, but it's sure
to lave me, clear and clane, and a fortnight or so afore I come here; I
never wanst feels a bit iv it, while I rouse and prepare myself for the
Island, nor for a month after I come here agen, Glory be to God."
 She then turned to her companion, and commenced, in a voice half
audible--“Musha! Katty a-haygur, did ye iver lay your two livin' eyes
on so young a priest? a sweet and holy crathur he is, no doubt, and has
goodness in his face, may the Lord bless him!"

“Musha!" said she, “surely your Reverence can't be long afther bein'
ordained, I'm thinkin'?"

“Well, that's very strange," said I, evading her, “so you tell me your
heartburn leaves you, and that you get stout every year about the time
of your pilgrimage?"

“An' troth an' I do!--hut! what am I sayin'? Indeed, sir, may be that's
more than I can say, either, your Reverence: but for sartin'it is"--

“Do you mean that you do, or that you do not?" I inquired.

“Indeed, your Reverence, you jist hot it--the Lord bless you, and spare
you to the parents that reared ye; an' proud people may they be at
having the likes of 'im, Katty avourneen"--turning abruptly to Katty,
that she might disarm my interogatories on this tender subject with a
better grace--“proud people, as I said afore, the Lord may spare him to
them!"

We here topped a little hill, and saw the spire of a steeple, and the
skirts of a country town, which a passenger told us was about three
miles distant.

My feet by this time were absolutely in griskins, nor was I by any means
prepared for a most unexpected proposal, which the spokeswoman, after
some private conversation with the other, undertook to make. I could not
imagine what the purport of the dialogue was; but I easily saw, that
I myself was the subject of it, for I could perceive them glance at me
occasionally, as if they felt a degree of hesitation in laying down
the matter for my approval; at length she opened it with great
adroitness:--“Musha, an' to be sure he will, Katty dear an' darlin'--and
mightn't you know he would--the refusin' to do it isn't in his face, as
any body that has eyes to see may know--you ashamed!--and what for would
ye be ashamed?--asthore, it's 'imself that's not proud, or he wouldn't
tramp it, barefooted, along wud two ould crathurs like huz; him that has
no sin to answer for--but I'll spake to 'im myself, and yell see it's
he that won't refuse it. Why thin, your Reverence, Katty an' I war
thinkin', that as there's only three of us, an' the town's afore us,
where we'll rest a while, plaise God--for by that time the shower that's
away over there will be comin' down;--that as there's but three of us,
would it be any harm if we sed a bit of a Rosary, and your Reverence to
join us?"

This was, indeed, a most unexpected attack; but it was evident that I
was set down by this curious woman as a paragon of piety; though
indeed her object was rather to smooth the way in my mind, for what she
intended should be a very excellent opinion of her own godliness.

I looked about me, and as far as my eye could reach, the road appeared
solitary. I did, 'tis true, debate the matter with myself, pro and con,
for I felt the absurdity of my situation, and of this abrupt proposal,
more than I was willing to suppose I did. Still, thought I, it is a
serious thing to refuse praying with this poor woman, because she is
poor--God is no respecter of person--this too is a Rosary to the Blessed
Virgin; besides, nothing can be too humbling for a person when once
engaged in this holy station--“So, pride, I trample you under my feet!"
 said I to myself, at a moment when the appearance of a respectable
person on the road would have routed all my humility. I complied,
however, with a very condescending grace, and to it we went. The old
women pulled out their beads, and I got my hat, which had one of my
shoes in it, under my arm. They requested that I would open the Rosary,
which I did: and thus we kept tossing the ball of prayer from one to
another along the way, whilst I was bending and sinking on the hard
gravel in perfect agony. But we had not gone far, when the shower, which
we did not suppose would have fallen until we should reach the town,
began to descend with greater bounty than we were at all prepared for,
or than I was, at least; for I had no outside coat: but indeed the
morning was so beautiful, that rain was scarcely to be apprehended. With
respect to the old lady, she appeared to be better acquainted with the
necessary preparations for such a journey than I had been: for as soon
as the shower became heavy (and it fell very heavily), she whipped off
her cloak, and before I could say a syllable to the contrary, had it
pinned about me. She then drew out of a large four-cornered pocket
of red cloth, that hung at her side, a hare's-skin cap, which in
a twinkling was on her own cranium. But what was most singular,
considering the heat of the weather, was the appearance of an excellent
frieze jacket, such as porters and draymen usually wear, with two
outside pockets on the sides, into one of which she drove her arm up to
the elbow, and in the other hand carried her staff like a man--I thought
she wore the cap, too, a little to the one side on her head. Indeed,
a more ludicrous appearance could scarcely be conceived than she now
exhibited. I, on the other hand, cut an original figure, being six
feet high, with a short gray cloak pinned tightly about me, my black
cassimere small-clothes peeping below it--my long, yellow, polar legs,
unencumbered with calves, quite naked--a good hat over the cloak--but
no shoes on my feet, marching thus gravely upon my pilgrimage, with two
such figures!

In this singular costume did we advance the rain all the time falling
in torrents. The town, however, was not far distant, and we arrived at
a little thatched house, where “dry lodgin'" was offered above the door,
both to “man and baste;" and never did an unfortunate group stand more
in need of dry lodging, for we were wet to the skin. On entering the
town, we met a carriage, in which were a gentleman and two ladies: I
chanced to be walking a little before the woman, but could perceive, by
casting a glance into the carriage, that they were in convulsions with
laughter; to which I have strong misgivings of having contributed in no
ordinary degree. But I felt more indignant at the wit, forsooth, of the
well-fed serving-man behind the coach, who should also have his joke
upon us; for as we passed, he turned to my companion, whom he addressed
as a male personage--“And why, you old villain, do you drive your cub to
the 'island' pinioned in such a manner,--give him the use of his
arms, you sinner!"--thus intimating that I was a booby son of her's
in leading-strings. The old lady looked at him with a very peculiar
expression of countenance; I thought she smiled, but never did a smile
appear to me so pregnant with bitterness and cursing scorn. “Ay," said
she, “there goes the well-fed heretic, that neither fasts nor prays--his
God is his belly--they have the fat of the land for the present, your
Reverence, but wait a bit. In the mane time, we had betther get in
here a little, till this shower passes--you see the sun's beginnin' to
brighten behind the rain, so it can't last long: and a bit of breakfast
will do none of us any harm." We then entered the house aforesaid, which
presented a miserable prospect for refreshment; but as I was in some
measure identified with my fellow-travelers, I could not with a good
grace give them up. I had not at the time the least experience of the
world, was incapable of that discrimination which guides some people, as
it were by instinct, in choosing their society, and had altogether but
a poor notion of the more refined decorum of life. When we got in, the
equivocal lady began to exercise some portion of authority. “Come," said
she, “here's a clargyman, and you had betther lose no time in gettin'
his Reverence his breakfast;" then, said, the civil creature to the
mistress, in the same kind of half audible tone--

“Avourneen, if you have anything comfortable, get it for him; he is
generous, an' will pay you well for it; a blessed crathur he is too, as
ever brought good luck under your roof; Lord love you, if ye hard him
discoursin' uz along the road, as if he was one of ourselves, so mild
and sweet! I'm sure I'll always have a good opinion of myself for
puttin' on the jacket this bout, at any rate, as I was able to spare his
Reverence the cloak, a-haygur! the mild crathur!"

While my fellow traveller was thus talking, I had time to observe that
the woman of the house was a cleanly-looking creature, with something of
a sickly appearance. An old gray-headed man sat in something between a
chair and a stool, formed of one solid piece of ash, supported by three
legs sloping outwards; the seat of it was quite smooth by long use, and
a circular row of rungs, capped by a piece of semicircular wood, shaped
to receive the reclining body of whoever might occupy it, rose from the
seat in presumptuous imitation of an arm-chair. There were two other
chairs besides this, but the remainder of the seats were all stools. The
room was square, with a bed in each of the corners adjoining the fire,
covered with blue drugget quilts, stoutly quilted; there was another
room in which the travellers slept. Opposite me on the wall was the
appropriate picture of St. Patrick himself, with his crosier in hand,
driving all kinds of venomous reptiles out of the kingdom. The Hermit
of Killamey was on his right, and the Yarmouth Tragedy, or the dolorious
history of Jemmy and Nancy, two unfortunate lovers, on his left. Such is
the rigorous economy of a pilgrimage, and such is the circumstances of
the greater part of those who undertake it, that it is to houses of this
description the generality of them resort. These “dry lodging" houses
may not improperly be called Pilgrims' Inns, a great number of them
being opened only during the continuance of the three months in which
the stations are performed.

Breakfast was now got ready, but it was evident that my two companions
had not been taken into account; for there was “an equipage" only for
one. I inquired from my speaking partner if she and her fellow-traveller
would not breakfast. The only reply I received was a sorrowful shake
of the head, and “Och, no, plaise your Reverence, no!" in quite an
exhausted cadence. On hearing this, the kind landlady gave them a look
of uncommon pity, exclaiming at the same time, as if in communication
with her own feelings, “Musha, God pity them, the poor crathurs; an
they surely can't but be both wake an ungry afther sich a journey, this
blessed an' broilin'day--och! och! if I had it or could afford it, an'
they shouldn't want, any way--arrah, won't ye thry and ate a bit of
something?" addressing herself to them. “Ooh, then, no, alanna, but I'd
just thank ye for a dhrink of cowld wather, if ye plase; an' that may
be the strengthenin' of us a bit." I saw at once that their own little
stock of provisions, if they really had any, was too scanty to allow the
simple creatures the indulgence of a regular meal; still I thought
they might, if they felt so very weak, have taken even the slightest
refreshment from their bags. However, I was bound in honor, and also in
charity, to give them their breakfast, which I ordered accordingly
for them both, it being, I considered, only fair that as we had prayed
together we should eat together. Whilst we were at breakfast, the
landlady, with a piece of foresight for which I afterwards thanked her,
warmed a pot of water, in which my feet were bathed; she then took out a
large three-cornered pincushion with tassels, which hung at her side, a
darning needle, and having threaded it, she drew a white woollen thread
several times along a piece of soap, pressing it down with her thumb
until it was quite soapy; this she drew very tenderly through the
blisters which were risen on my feet, cutting it at both ends, and
leaving a part of it in the blister. It is decidedly the best remedy
that ever was tried, for I can declare that during the remainder of my
pilgrimage, not one of these blisters gave me the least pain.

When breakfast was over, and these kind attentions performed, we set out
once more; and from this place, I remarked, as we advanced, that an odd
traveller would fall in upon the way: so that before we had gone many
miles farther, the fatigue of the journey was much lessened by the
society of the pilgrims. These were now collected into little groups, of
from three to a dozen, each, with the exception of myself and one or
two others of a decenter cast, having the staff and bag. The chat and
anecdotes were, upon the whole, very amusing; but although there was a
great variety of feature, character, and costume among so many, as
must always be the case where people of different lives, habits, and
pursuits, are brought together; still I could perceive that there was a
shade of strange ruminating abstraction apparent on all. I could observe
the cheerful narrator relapse into a temporary gloom, or a fit of
desultory reflection, as some train of thought would suddenly rise
in his mind. I could sometimes perceive a shade of pain; perhaps of
anguish, darken the countenance of another, as if a bitter recollection
was awakened; yet this often changed, by an unexpected transition, to
a gleam of joy and satisfaction, as if a quick sense or hope of relief
flashed across his heart.

When we came near Petigo, the field for observation was much enlarged.
The road was then literally alive with pilgrims, and reminded me, as far
as numbers were concerned, of the multitudes that flocked to market on
a fair-day. Petigo is a snug little town, three or four miles from the
lake, where the pilgrims all sleep on the night before the commencement
of their stations. When we were about five or six miles from it, the
road presented a singular variety of grouping. There were men and
women of all ages, from the sprouting devotee of twelve, to the hoary,
tottering pilgrim of eighty, creeping along, bent over his staff, to
perform this soul-saving work, and die.

Such is the reverence in which this celebrated place is held, that as
we drew near it, I remarked the conversation to become slack; every face
put on an appearance of solemnity and thoughtfulness, and no man was
inclined to relish the conversation of his neighbor or to speak himself.
The very women were silent. Even the lassitude of the journey was
unfelt, and the unfledged pilgrim, as he looked up in his father's or
mother's face, would catch the serious and severe expression he saw
there, and trot silently on, forgetting that he was fatigued.

For my part, I felt the spirit of the scene strongly, yet, perhaps, not
with such an exclusive interest as others. I had not only awe, terror,
enthusiasm, pride, and devotion to manage, but suffered heavy annoyance
from the inroad of a villanous curiosity which should thrust itself
among the statelier feelings of the occasion, and set all attempts to
restrain it at defiance. It was a sad bar to my devotions, which,
but for its intrusion, I might have conducted with more meritorious.
steadiness. How, for instance, was it possible for me to register the
transgressions of my whole life, heading them under the “seven deadly
sins," with such a prospect before me as the beautiful waters and shores
of Lough Erne?

Despite of all the solemnity about me, my unmanageable eye would turn
from the very blackest of the seven deadly offences, and the stoutest
of the four cardinal virtues, to the beetling, abrupt, and precipitous
rocks which hung over the lake as if ready to tumble into its waters. I
broke away, too, from several “acts of contrition" to conjecture
whether the dark, shadowy inequalities which terminated the horizon,
and penetrated, methought, into the very skies far beyond the lake, were
mountains or clouds: a dark problem, which to this day I have not been
able to solve. Nay, I was taken twice, despite of the most virtuous
efforts to the contrary, from a Salve Regina, to watch a little skiff,
which shone with its snowy sail spread before the radiant evening sun,
and glided over the waters, like an angel sent on some happy-message. In
fact, I found my heart on the point of corruption, by indulging in what
I had set down in my vocabulary as the lust of the eye, and had some
faint surmise that I was plunging into obduracy. I accordingly made a
private mark with the nail of my thumb, on the “act of contrition" in my
prayer-book, and another on the Salve Regina, that I might remember
to confess for these devilish wanderings. But what all my personal piety
could not effect, a lucky turn in the road accomplished, by bringing me
from the view of the lake; and thus ended my temptations and my defeats
on these points.

When we got into Petigo, we found the lodging-houses considerably
crowded. I contrived, however, to establish myself as well as another,
and in consequence of my black, dress and the garrulous industry of my
epicene companion, who stuck close to me all along, was treated with
more than common respect. And here I was deeply impressed with the
remarkable contour of many visages, which I had now a better opportunity
of examining than while on the road. There seemed every description of
guilt, and every degree of religious feeling, mingled together in the
same mass, and all more or less subdued by the same principle of abrupt
and gloomy abstraction.

There was a little man dressed in a turned black coat, and drab
cassimere small-clothes, who struck me as a remarkable figure; his back
was long, his legs and thighs short and he walked on the edge of his
feet. He had a pale, sorrowful face, with bags hung under his eyes,
drooping eyelids, no beard, no brows, and no chin; for in the place of
the two latter, there was a slight frown where the brows ought to have
been, and a curve in the place of the chin, merely perceptible from the
bottom of his underlip to his throat. He wore his own hair, which was a
light bay, so that you could scarcely distinguish it from a wig. I was
given to understand that he was a religious tailor under three blessed
orders.

There was another round-shouldered man, with black, twinkling eyes,
plump face, rosy cheeks, and nose twisted at the top. In his character,
humor appeared to be the predominant principle. He was evidently an
original, and, I am sure, had the knack of turning the ludicrous side
of every object towards him. His eye would roll about from one person to
another while fingering his beads, with an expression of humor something
like delight beaming from his fixed, steady countenance; and when
anything that would have been particularly worthy of a joke met his
glance, I could perceive a tremulous twinkle of the eye intimating his
inward enjoyment. I think still this jocular abstinence was to him the
severest part of the pilgrimage. I asked him was he ever at the “Island"
 before; he peered into my face with a look that infected me with
risibility, without knowing why, shrugged up his shoulders, looked into
the fire, and said “No," with a dry emphatic cough after it--as much as
to say, you may apply my answer to the future as well as to the past.
Religion, I thought, was giving him up, or sent him here as a last
resource. He spoke to nobody.

A little behind the humorist sat a very tall, thin, important-looking
personage, dressed in a shabby black coat; there was a cast of severity
and self-sufficiency in his face, which at once indicated him to be
a man of office and authority, little accustomed to have his own
will disputed. I was not wrong in my conjecture; he was a classical
schoolmaster, and was pompously occupied, when I first saw him,
reading through his spectacles, with his head raised aloft, the seven
Penitential Psalms in Latin, out of the Key of Paradise, to a circle
of women and children, along with two or three men in frieze coats, who
listened with profound attention.

A little to the right of Syntax, were a man and woman--the man engaged
in teaching the woman a Latin charm against the colic, to which it seems
she was subject. Although they all, for the most part, who were in the
large room about us, prayed aloud, yet by fastening the attention on any
particular person, you could hear what he said. I therefore heard, the
words of this charm, and as my memory is not bad, I still remember them;
they ran thus:

Petrus sedebat super lapidem marmoreain juxta cedem Jerusalem et
dolebat, Jesus veniebat et rogabat “Petre, quid doles?" “Doleo vento
ventre." “Surge, Petre, et sanus esto." Et quicunque haec verba non
scripta sed memoriter tradita recitat nunquam dolebit vento ventre.

These are the words literally, but I need not say, that had the poor
woman sat there since, she would not have got them impressed on her
memory.

There were also other countenances in which a man might almost read
the histories of their owners. Methought I could perceive the lurking,
unsubdued spirit of the battered rake, in the leer of his roving eye,
while he performed, in the teeth of his flesh, blood, and principles,
the delusive vow to which the shrinking spirit, at the approach of
death, on the bed of sickness, clung, as to its salvation; for it was
evident that superstition had only exacted from libertinism what fear
and ignorance had promised her.

I could note the selfish, griping miser, betraying his own soul, and
holding a false promise to his heart, as with lank jaw, keen eye, and
brow knit with anxiety for the safety of his absent wealth, he joined
some group, sager if possible to defraud them even of the benefit of
their prayers, and attempting to practise that knavery upon heaven which
had been so successful upon earth.

I could see the man of years, I thought, withering away under the
disconsolation of an ill-spent life, old without peace, and gray without
wisdom, flattering himself that he is religious because he prays,
and making a merit of offering to God that which Satan had rejected;
thinking, too, that he has withdrawn from sin, because the ability
of committing it has left him, and taking credit for subduing his
propensities, although they have only died in his nature.

I could mark, too, I fancied, the stiff, set features of the pharisee,
affecting to instruct others, that he might show his own superiority,
and descanting on the merits of works, that his hearers might know he
performed them himself.

I could also observe the sly, demure over-doings of the hypocrite, and
mark the deceitful lines of grave meditation running along that part
of his countenance where in others the front of honesty lies open and
expanded. I could trace him when he got beyond his depth, where the want
of sincerity in religion betrayed his ignorance of its forms. I could
note the scowling, sharp-visaged bigot, wrapt up in the nice observance
of trifles, correcting others, if the object of their supplications
embraced anything within a whole hemisphere of heresy, and not so much
happy because he thought himself the way of salvation, as because he
thought others out of it--a consideration which sent pleasure tingling
to his fingers' ends.

But notwithstanding all this, I noticed, through the gloom of the place,
many who were actuated by genuine, unaffected piety, from whom charity
and kindness beamed forth through all the disadvantages around them.
Such people, for the most part, prayed in silence and alone. Whenever
I saw a man or woman anxious to turn away their faces, and separate
themselves from the flocks of gregarious babblers, I seldom failed to
witness the outpouring of a contrite spirit. I have certainly seen, in
several instances, the tear of heartfelt repentance bedew the sinner's
cheek. I observed one peculiarly interesting female who struck me
very much. In personal beauty she was very lovely--her form perfectly
symmetrical, and she evidently belonged to rather a better order of
society. Her dress was plain, though her garments were by no means
common. She could scarcely be twenty, and yet her face told a tale of
sorrow, of deep, wasting, desolating sorrow. As the prayers, hymns, and
religious conversations which wont on, were peculiar to the place, time,
and occasion--it being near the hour of rest:--she probably did not
feel that reluctance in going to pray in presence of so many which she
otherwise would have felt. She kept her eye on a certain female who had
a remote dusky corner to pray in, and the moment she retired from it,
this young creature went up and there knelt down. But what a contrast to
the calm, unconscious, and insipid mummery which went on at the moment
through the whole room! Her prayer was short, and she had neither book
nor beads; but the heavings of her bosom, and her suppressed sobs,
sufficiently proclaimed her sincerity. Her petition, indeed, seemed to
go to heaven from a broken heart. When it was finished, she remained a
few moments on her knees, and dried her eyes with her handkerchief. As
she rose up, I could mark the modest, timid glance, and the slight
blush as she presented herself again amongst the company, where all were
strangers. I thought she appeared, though in the midst of such a number,
to be woefully and pitiably alone.

As for my own companion, she absolutely made the grand tour of all the
praying knots on the promises, having taken a very tolerable bout with
each. There were two qualities in which she shone preeminent--voice and
distinctness; for she gave by far the loudest and most monotonous chant.
Her visage also was remarkable, for her complexion resembled the dark,
dingy red of a winter apple. She had a pair of very piercing black eyes,
with which, while kneeling with her body thrown back upon her heels as
if they were a cushion, she scrutinized, at her ease, every one in the
room, rocking herself gently from side to side. The poor creature paid
a marked attention to the interesting young woman I have just mentioned.
At last, they dropped off one by one to bed, that they might be up early
the next morning for the Lough, with the exception of some half-dozen,
more long-winded than the rest whose voices I could hear at their sixth
rosary, in the rapid elevated tone peculiar to Catholic devotion, until
I fell asleep.

The next morning, when I awoke, I joined with all haste the aggregate
crowd that proceeded in masses towards the lake--or Purgatory--which
lies amongst the hills that extend to the north-east of Petigo. While
ascending the bleak, hideous mountain range, whose ridge commands a full
view of this celebrated scene of superstition, the manner and appearance
of the pilgrims were deeply interesting. Such groupings as pressed
forward around me would have made line studies either for him who wished
to deplore or to ridicule the degradations and absurdities of human
nature; indeed there was an intense interest in the scene. I look
back at this moment with awe towards the tremulous and high-strained
vibrations of my mind, as it responded to the excitement. Reader, have
you ever approached the Eternal City? have you ever, from the dreary
solitudes of the Campagna, seen the dome of St. Peter's for the first
time? and have the monuments of the greatest men and the mightiest deeds
that ever the earth witnessed--have the names of the Caesars, and the
Catos, and the Scipios, excited a curiosity amounting to a sensation
almost too intense to be borne? I think I can venture to measure the
expansion of your mind, as it enlarged itself before the crowding
visions of the past, as the dim grandeur of ages rose up and developed
itself from amidst the shadows of time; and entranced amidst the magic
of your own associations, you desired to stop--you were almost content
to go no farther--your own Rome, you were in the midst of--Rome
free--Rome triumphant--Rome classical. And perhaps it is well you
awoke in good time from your shadowy dream, to escape from the unvaried
desolation and the wasting malaria that brooded all around. Reader, I
can fancy that such might have been your sensations when the domes
and the spires of the world's capital first met your vision; and I can
assure you, that while ascending the ridge that was to give me a view of
Patrick's Purgatory, my sensations were as impressively, as powerfully
excited. For I desire you to recollect, that the welfare of your
immortal soul was not connected with your imaginings, your magnificent
visions did not penetrate into the soul's doom. You were not submitted
to the agency, of a transcendental power. You were, in a word, a poet,
but not a fanatic. What comparison, then, could there be between the
exercise of your free, manly, cultivated understanding, and my feelings
on this occasion, with my thick-coming visions of immortality, that
almost lifted me from the mountain-path I was ascending, and brought me,
as it were, into contact with the invisible world? I repeat it, then,
that such were my feelings, when all the faculties which exist in the
mind were aroused and concentrated upon one object. In such a case,
the pilgrim stands, as it were, between life and death; and as it was
superstition that placed him there, she certainly conjures up to his
heated fancy those dark, fleeting, and indistinct images which are
adjusted to that gloom which she has already cast over his mind.
Although there could not be less than two hundred people, young and old,
boys and girls, men and women, the hale and the sickly, the blind and
the lame, all climbing to gain the top with as little delay as possible,
yet was there scarcely a sound, certainly not a word, to be heard among
them. For my part, I plainly heard the palpitations of my heart, both
loud and quick. Had I been told that the veil of eternity was about
to be raised before me at that moment, I could scarcely have felt more
intensely. Several females were obliged to rest for some time, in order
to gain both physical and moral strength--one fainted; and several old
men were obliged to sit down. All were praying, every crucifix was out,
every bead in requisition; and nothing broke a silence so solemn but a
low, monotonous murmur of deep devotion.

As soon as we ascended the hill, the whole scene was instantly before
us: a large lake, surrounded by an amphitheatre of mountains, bleak,
uncomfortable, and desolate. In the lake itself, about half a mile from
the edge next us, was to be seen the “Island," with two or three slated
houses on it, naked and un-plastered, as desolate-looking almost as the
mountains. A little range of exceeding low hovels, which a dwarf could
scarcely enter without stooping, appeared to the left; and the eye could
rest on nothing more, except a living mass of human beings crawling
slowly about. The first thing the pilgrim does when he gets a sight of
the lake, is to prostrate himself, kiss the earth, and then on his
knees offer up three Paters and Aves, and a Creed for the favor of being
permitted to see this blessed place. When this is over, he descends to
the lake, and after paying tenpence to the ferry-man, is rowed over to
the Purgatory.

When the whole view was presented to me, I stood for some time to
contemplate it; I cannot better illustrate the reaction which, took
place in my mind, than by saying that it resembles that awkward
inversion which a man's proper body experiences when, on going to pull
something from which he expects a marvellous assistance, it comes with
him at a touch, and the natural consequence is, that he finds his head
down and his heels up. That which dashed the whole scene from the
dark elevation in which the romance of devotion had placed it was the
appearance of slated houses, and of the smoke that curled from the
hovels and the prior's residence. This at once brought me back to
humanity: and the idea of roasting meat, boiling pots, and dressing
dinners, dispossessed every fine and fearful image which had floated
through my imagination for the last twelve hours. In fact, allowing for
the difference of situation, it nearly resembled John's Well, or James's
Fair, when beheld at a distance, turning the slated houses into inns,
and the hovels into tents. A certain idea, slight, untraceable, and
involuntary, went over my brain on that occasion, which, though it did
not then cost me a single effort of reflection, I think was revived
and developed at a future period of my life, and became, perhaps to a
certain extent, the means of opening a wider range of thought to my
mind, and of giving a new tone to my existence. Still, however,
nothing except my idea of its external appearance disappointed, me; I
accordingly ascended with the rest, and in a short time found myself
among the living mass upon the island.

The first thing I did was to hand over my three cakes of oaten bread
which I had got made in Petigo, tied up in a handkerchief, as well as
my hat and second shirt, to the care of the owner of one of the, huts:
having first, by the way, undergone a second prostration on touching the
island, and greeted it with fifteen holy kisses, and another string
of prayers. I then, according to the regulations, should commence the
stations, lacerated as my feet were after so long a journey; so that I
had not a moment to rest. Think, therefore, what I must have suffered,
on surrounding a large chapel, in the direction of from east to west,
over a pavement of stone spikes, every one of them making its way along
my nerves and muscles to my unfortunate brain. I was absolutely stupid
and dizzy with the pain, the praying, the jostling, the elbowing, the
scrambling and the uncomfortable penitential murmurs of the whole crowd.
I knew not what I was about, but went through the forms in the same
mechanical spirit which pervaded all present. As for that solemn,
humble, and heartfelt sense of God's presence, which Christian prayer
demands, its existence in the mind would not only be a moral but
a physical impossibility in Lough Derg. I verily think that if
mortification of the body, without conversion of the life or heart--if
penance and not repentance could save the soul, no wretch who performed
a pilgrimage here could with a good grace be damned. Out of hell the
place is matchless, and if there be a purgatory in the other world, it
may very well be said there is a fair rehearsal of it in the county of
Donegal in Ireland.

When I commenced my station, I started from what is called the “Beds,"
 and God help St. Patrick if he lay upon them: they are sharp stones
placed circularly in the earth, with the spike ends of them up, one
circle within another; and the manner in which the pilgrim gets as far
as the innermost, resembles precisely that in which school-boys enter
the “Walls of Troy" upon their slates. I moved away from these upon
the sharp stones with which the whole island is surfaced, keeping the
chapel, or “Prison," as it is called, upon my right; then turning, I
came round again with a circumbendibus, to the spot from which I
set out. During this circuit, as well as I can remember, I repeated
fifty-five paters and aves, and five creeds, or five decades; and be it
known, that the fifty prayers were offered up to the Virgin Mary, and
the odd five to God! I then commenced getting round the eternal beds,
during which I repeated, I think, fifteen paters and aves more; and as
the bods decreased in circumference, the prayers decreased in length,
until a short circuit and three paters and aves finished the last and
innermost of these blessed couches. I really forgot how many times each
day the prison and these beds are to be surrounded, and how many hundred
prayers are to be repeated during the circuit, though each circuit is in
fact making the grand tour of the island; but I never shall forget that
I was the best part of a July day at it, when the soles of my feet were
flayed, and the stones hot enough to broil a beefsteak! When the first
day's station was over, it is necessary to say that a little rest would
have been agreeable? But no, this would not suit the policy of the
place; here it may be truly said that there is no rest for the wicked.
The only luxury allowed me was the privilege of feasting upon one of my
cakes (having not tasted food that blessed day until then); upon one of
my cakes, I say, and a copious supply of the water of the lake, which,
to render the repast more agreeable, was made lukewarm! This was to keep
my spirits up after the delicate day's labor I had gone through, and to
cheer me against the pleasant prospect of a hard night's praying without
sleep, which lay in the back ground! But when I saw everyone at this
refreshing meal with a good, thick, substantial bannock, and then looked
at the immateriality of my own, I could not help reverting to the woman
who made them for me, with a degree of vivacity not altogether in unison
with the charity of a Christian. The knavish creature defrauded me of
one-half of the oatmeal, although I had purchased it myself in Petigo
for the occasion; being determined that as I was only to get two meals
in the three days, they should be such as a person could fast upon.
Never was there a man more bitterly disappointed; for they were not
thicker than crown-pieces, and I searched for them in my mouth to no
purpose--the only thing like substance I could feel there was the warm
water. At last, night came; but here to describe the horrors of what I
suffered I hold myself utterly inadequate. I was wedged in a shake-down
bed with seven others, one of whom was a Scotch Papist--another a man
with a shrunk leg, who wore a crutch--all afflicted with that disease
which northern men that feed on oatmeal are liable to; and then the
swarms that fell upon my poor young skin, and probed, and stung, and
fed on me! it was pressure and persecution almost insupportable, and yet
such was my fatigue that sleep even here began to weigh down my eyelids.

I was just on the point of enjoying a little rest, when a man ringing
a large hand-bell, came round crying out in a low, supernatural growl,
which could be heard double the distance of the loudest shout--“Waken
up, waken up, and come to the prison!" The words were no sooner out of
his mouth, than there was a sudden start, and a general scramble in the
dark for our respective garments. When we got dressed, we proceeded to
the waters of the lake, in which we washed our face and hands, repeating
prayers during the ablution. This to me was the most impressive and
agreeable part of the whole station. The night, while we were in bed,
or rather in torture, had become quite stormy, and the waves of the lake
beat against the shore with the violence of an agitated sea. There was
just sufficient moon to make the “darkness visible," and to show the
black clouds drifting with rapid confusion, in broken masses, over our
heads. This, joined to the tossing of the billows against the shore--the
dark silent groups that came, like shadows, stooping for a moment over
the surface of the waters, and retreating again in a manner which the
severity of the night rendered necessarily quick, raising thereby in the
mind the idea of gliding spirits--then the preconceived desolation
of the surrounding scenery--the indistinct shadowy chain of dreary
mountains which, faintly relieved by the lurid sky, hemmed in the
lake--the silence of the forms, contrasted with the tumult of the
elements about us--the loneliness of the place--its isolation and
remoteness from the habitations of men--all this put together, joined
to the feeling of deep devotion in which I was wrapped, had really a
sublime effect upon me. Upon the generality of those who were there,
blind to the natural beauty and effect of the hour and the place, and
viewing it only through the medium of superstitious awe, it was indeed
calculated to produce the notion of something not belonging to the
circumstance and reality of human life.

From this scene we passed to one, which, though not characterized by its
dark, awful beauty, was scarcely inferior to it in effect. It was called
the “Prison," and it is necessary to observe here, that every pilgrim
must pass twenty-four hours in this place, kneeling, without food or
sleep, although one meal of bread and warm water, and whatever sleep he
could get in Petigo with seven in a bed, were his allowance of food and
sleep during the twenty-four hours previous. I must here beg the good
reader's attention for a moment, with, reference to our penance in the
“Prison." Let us consider how the nature of this pilgrimage: it must be
performed on foot, no matter what the distance of residence (allowing
for voyages)--the condition of life--the age or the sex of the pilgrim
may be. Individuals from France, from America, England, and Scotland,
visit it--as voluntary devotees, or to perform an act of penance for
some great crime, or perhaps to atone for a bad life in general. It is
performed, too, in the dead heat of summer, when labor is slack, and the
lower orders have sufficient leisure to undertake it; and, I may add,
when travelling on foot is most fatiguing; they arrive, therefore,
without a single exception, blown and jaded almost to death. The first
thing they do, notwithstanding this, is to commence the fresh rigors of
the station, which occupies them several hours. This consists in what
I have already described, viz., the pleasant promenade upon the stony
spikes around the prison and the “beds;" that over, they take their
first and only meal for the day; after which, as in my own case just
related, they must huddle themselves in clusters, on what is barefacedly
called a bed, but which is nothing more nor less than a beggarman's
shakedown, where the smell, the heat, the filth, and above all, the
vermin, are intolerable to the very farthest stretch of the superlative
degree. As soon as their eyes begin to close here, they are roused
by the bell-man, and summoned at the hour of twelve--first washing
themselves as aforesaid, in the lake, and then adjourning to the prison
which I am about to describe. There is not on earth, with the exception
of pagan rites,--and it is melancholy to be compelled to compare any
institution of the Christian religion with a Juggernaut,--there is not
on earth, I say, a regulation of a religious nature, more barbarous
and inhuman than this. It has destroyed thousands since its
establishment--has left children without parents, and parents childless.
It has made wives widows, and torn from the disconsolate husband the
mother of his children; and is itself the monster which St. Patrick is
said to have destroyed in the place--a monster, which is a complete and
significant allegory of this great and destructive superstition.
But what is even worse than death, by stretching the powers of human
sufferance until the mind cracks under them, it is said sometimes
to return these pitiable creatures maniacs--exulting in the laugh
of madness, or sunk for ever in the incurable apathy of religious
melancholy. I mention this now, to exhibit the purpose for which these
calamities are turned to account, and the dishonesty which is
exercised over these poor, unsuspecting people, in consequence of their
occurrence. The pilgrims, being thus aroused at midnight are sent to
prison; and what think you is the impression under which they enter it?
one indeed, which, when we consider their bodily weakness and mental
excitement, must do its work with success. It is this: that as soon as
they enter the prison a supernatural tendency to sleep will come over
them, which, they say, is peculiar to the place; that this is an emblem
of the influence of sin over the soul, and a type of their future fate;
that if they resist this they will be saved; but if they yield to it,
they will not only be damned in the next world, but will go mad, or
incur some immediate and dreadful calamity in this. Is it any wonder
that a weak mind and exhausted body, wrought upon by these bugbears,
should induce upon by itself, by its own terrors, the malady of
derangement? We know that nothing acts so strongly and so fatally upon
reason, as an imagination diseased by religious terrors: and I regret
to say, that I had upon that night an opportunity of witnessing a fatal
instance of it.

After having washed ourselves in the dark waters of the lake, we entered
this famous prison, which is only a naked, unplastered chapel, with
an altar against one of the sides and two galleries. On entering this
place, a scene presented itself altogether unparalleled on the earth,
and in every point of view capable to sustain the feelings raised in the
mind by the midnight scenery of the lake as seen during the ablutions.
The prison was full, but not crowded; for had it been crowded, we would
have been happy. It was, however, just sufficiently filled to give every
individual the pleasure of sustaining himself, without having it in his
power to recline for a moment in an attitude of rest, or to change that
most insupportable of all bodily suffering, uniformity of position.
There we knelt upon a hard ground floor, and commenced praying; and
again I must advert to the policy which prevails in this island.
During the period of imprisonment, there are no prescribed prayers nor
ceremonies whatever to be performed, and this is the more strange, as
every other stage of the station has its proper devotions. But these are
suspended here, lest the attention of the prisoners might be fixed on
any particular object, and the supernatural character of drowsiness
imputed to the place be thus doubted--they are, therefore, turned in
without anything to excite them to attention or to resist the propensity
to sleep occasioned by their fatigue and want of rest Having thus
nothing to do, nothing to sustain, nothing to stimulate them, it is very
natural that they should, even if unexhausted by previous lassitude, be
inclined to sleep; but everything that can weigh them down is laid upon
them in this heavy and oppressive superstition, that the strong delusion
may be kept up.

On entering the prison, I was struck with the dim religious twilight
of the place. Two candles gleamed faintly from the altar, and there was
something I thought of a deadly light about them, as they burned feebly
and stilly against the darkness which hung over the other part of the
building. Two priests, facing the congregation, stood upon the altar in
silence, with pale spectral visages, their eyes catching an unearthly
glare from the sepulchral light of the slender tapers. But that which
was strangest of all, and, as I said before, without a parallel in
this world, was the impression and effect produced by the deep, drowsy,
hollow, hoarse, guttural, ceaseless, and monotonous hum, which proceeded
from about four hundred individuals, half asleep and at prayer; for
their cadences were blended and slurred into each other, as they
repeated, in an awe-struck and earnest undertone, the prayers in which
they were engaged. It was certainly the strangest sound I ever heard,
and resembled a thousand subterraneous groans, uttered in a kind of low,
deep, unvaried chant. Nothing could produce a sense of gloomy alarm in
a weak superstitious mind equal to this; and it derived much of its wild
and singular character, as well as of its lethargic influence, from its
continuity; for it still--still rung lowly and supernaturally on my ear.
Perhaps the deep, wavy prolongation of the bass of a large cathedral
bell, or that low, continuous sound, which is distinct from its higher
and louder intonations, would give a faint notion of it, yet only a
faint one; for the body of hoarse monotony here was immense. Indeed,
such a noise had something so powerfully lulling, that human nature,
even excited by the terrible suggestions of superstitious fear, was
scarcely able to withstand it.

Now the poor pilgrims forget, that this strong disposition to sleep
arises from the weariness produced by their long journeys--by the
exhausting penance of the station, performed without giving them time
to rest--by the other still more natural consequence of not giving
them time to sleep--by the drowsy darkness of the chapel--and by the
heaviness caught from the low peculiar murmur of the pilgrims, which
would of itself overcome the lightest spirit. I was here but a very
short time when I began to doze, and just as my chin was sinking
placidly on my breast, and the words of an Ave Maria dying upon my
lips, I felt the charm all at once broken by a well-meant rap upon the
occiput, conferred through the instrumentality of a little angry-looking
squat urchin of sixty years, and a remarkably good black-thorn cudgel,
with which he was engaged in thwacking the heads of such sinners, as,
not having the dread of insanity and the regulations of the place before
their eyes, were inclined to sleep. I declare the knock I received
told to such a purpose on my head, that nothing occurred during the
pilgrimage that vexed me so much.

After all, I really slept the better half of the night; yet so
indescribably powerful was the apprehension of derangement, that my
hypocritical tongue wagged aloud at the prayers, during these furtive
naps. Nay, I not only slept but dreamed. I experienced also that
singular state of being, in which, while the senses are accessible
to the influence of surrounding objects, the process of thought is
suspended, the man seems to enjoy an inverted existence, in which the
soul sleeps, and the body remains awake and susceptible of external
impressions. I once thought I was washing myself in the lake, and that
the dashing noise of its waters rang in my ears: I also fancied myself
at home in conversation with my friends; yet, in neither case, did I
altogether forget where I was. Still in struggling to bring my mind
back, so paramount was the dread of awaking deranged should I fall
asleep, that these occasional visions--associating themselves with this
terror--and this again broken in upon by the hoarse murmurs about me,
throwing their dark shades on every object that passed my imagination,
the force of reason being too vague at the moment; these occasional
visions I say, and this jumbling together of broken images and
disjointed thoughts, had such an effect upon me, that I imagined several
times that the awful penalty was exacted, and that my reason was gone
for ever. I frequently started, and on seeing two dim lights upon the
altar, and on hearing the ceaseless and eternal murmurs going on--going
on--around me, without being immediately able to ascribe them to their
proper cause, I set myself down as a lost man; for on that terror I
was provokingly clear during the whole night. I more than once gave an
involuntary groan or shriek, on finding myself in this singular state;
so did many others, and these groans and shrieks were wildly and
fearfully contrasted with the never-ending hum, which, like the
ceaseless noise of a distant waterfall, went on during the night. The
perspiration occasioned by this inconceivable distress, by the heat of
the place, and by the unchangeableness of my position, flowed profusely
from every core. About two o'clock in the morning an unhappy young man,
either in a state of lethargic indifference, or under the influence
of these sudden paroxysms, threw himself, or fell from one of the
galleries, and was so shattered by the fall that he died next day at
twelve o'clock,--and, what was not much to the credit of the clergymen
on the island--without the benefit of the clergy; for I saw a priest
with his stole and box of chrism finishing off his extreme unction when
he was quite dead. This is frequently done in the Church of Rome, under
a hope that life may not be utterly extinct, and that consequently the
final separation of the soul and body may not have taken place.

In this prison, during the night, several persons go about with rods and
staves, rapping those on the head whom they see heavy; snuff-boxes
also go around very freely, elbows are jogged, chins chucked, and ears
twitched, for the purpose of keeping each other awake. The rods and
staves are frequently changed from hand to hand, and I thought it would
be a lucky job if I could get one for a little, to enable me to change
my position. I accordingly asked a man who had been a long time banging
in this manner, if he would allow me to take his place for some time,
and he was civil enough to do so. I therefore set out on my travels
through the prison, rapping about me at a great rate, and with
remarkable effect; for, whatever was the cause of it, I perceived that
not a soul seemed the least inclined to doze after a visit from me; on
the contrary, I observed several to scratch their heads, giving me at
the same time significant looks of very sincere thankfulness.

But what I am convinced was the most meritorious act of my whole
pilgrimage, as it was certainly the most zealously performed, was a
remembrance I gave the squat fellow, who visited me in the early part
of the night. He was engaged, tooth and nail, with another man, at a De
Profundis, and although not asleep at the time, yet on the principle
that prevention is better than cure, I thought it more prudent to
let him have his rap before the occasion for it might come on: he
accordingly got full payment, at compound interest, for the villanous
knock he had lent me before.

This employment stirred my blood a little, and I got much lighter. I
could now pay some attention to the scene about me, and the first object
that engaged it was a fellow with a hare-lip, who had completely taken
the lead at prayer. The organs of speech seemed to have been transferred
from his mouth to his nose, and, although Irish was his vernacular
language, either some fool or knave had taught him to say his prayers in
English: and you may take this as an observation founded on fact,
that the language which a Roman Catholic of the lower class does not
understand, is the one in which it is disposed to pray. As for him he
had lots of English prayers, though he was totally ignorant of that
language. The twang from the nose, the loud and rapid tone in which he
spoke, and the malaproprian happiness with which he travestied every
prayer he uttered, would have compelled any man to smile. The priests
laughed outright before the whole congregation, particularly one of
them, whom I well knew; the other turned his face towards the altar, and
leaning over a silver pix, in which, according to their own tenets, the
Redeemer of the world must have been at that moment, as it contained
the consecrated wafers, gave full vent to his risibility. Now it is
remarkable that no one present attached the slightest impropriety to
this--I for one did not; although it certainly occurred to me with full
force at a subsequent period.

When morning came, the blessed light of the sun broke the leaden charm
of the prison, and infused into us a wonderful portion of fresh vigor.
This day being the second from our arrival, we had our second station to
perform, and consequently all the sharp spikes to re-traverse. We were
not permitted at all to taste food during these twenty-four hours, so
that our weakness was really very great. I beg leave, however, to return
my special acknowledgments for the truly hospitable allowance of wine
with which I, in common with every other pilgrim, was treated. This
wine is made by filling a large pot with the lake water, and making it
lukewarm. It is then handed round in jugs and wooden noggins--to their
credit be it recorded--in the greatest possible abundance. On this alone
I breakfasted, dined, and supped, during the second or prison day of my
pilgrimage.

At twelve o'clock that night we left prison, and made room for another
squadron, who gave us their kennels. Such a luxury was sleep to me,
however, that I felt not the slightest inconvenience from the vermin,
though I certainly made a point to avoid the Scotchman and the cripple.
On the following day I confessed; and never was an unfortunate soul so
grievously afflicted with a bad memory as I was on that occasion--the
whole thing altogether, but particularly the prison scene, had knocked
me up, I could not therefore remember a tithe of my sins; and the
priest, poor man, had really so much to do, and was in such a hurry,
that he had me clean absolved before I had got half through the preface,
or knew what I was about. I then went with a fresh batch to receive the
sacrament, which I did from the hands of the good-natured gentleman who
enjoyed so richly the praying talents of the hare-lipped devotee in the
prison.

I cannot avoid mentioning here a practice peculiar to Roman Catholics,
which consists in an exchange of one or more prayers, by a stipulation
between two persons: I offer up a pater and ave for you, and you
again for me. It is called swapping or exchanging prayers. After I had
received the sacrament, I observed a thin, sallow little man, with a
pair of beads, as long as himself, moving from knot to knot, but never
remaining long in the same place. At last he glided up to me, and in a
whisper asked me if I knew him. I answered in the negative. “Oh, then, a
lanna, ye war never here before?" “Never." “Oh, I see that, acushla, you
would a known me if you had: well then, did ye never hear of Sol Donnel,
the pilgrim?"

“I never did," I replied, “but are we not all pilgrims while here?"

“To be sure, aroon, but I'm a pilgrim every place else, you see, as well
as here, my darlin' sweet young man."

“Then you're a pilgrim by profession?"

“That's it, asthore machree; everybody that comes here the second time,
sure, knows Sol Donnel, the blessed pilgrim."

“In that case it was impossible for me to know you, as I was-never here
before."

“Acushla, I know that, but a good beginnin' are ye makin' of it--an' at
your time of life too; but, avick, it must prosper wid ye, comin' here I
mane."

“I hope it may." “Well yer parents isn't both livin' it's likely?"
 “No." “Aye! but yell jist not forget that same, ye see; I b'lieve I sed
so--your father dead, I suppose?" “No, my mother." “Your mother; well,
avick, I didn't say that for a sartinty; but still, you see, avourneen,
maybe somebody could a tould ye it was the mother, forhaps, afther
all." “Did you know them?" I asked. “You see, a lanna, I can't say that,
without first hearin' their names." “My name is B------." “An' a dacent
bearable name it is, darlin'. Is yer father of them da-cent people, the
B------s of Newtownlimavady, ahagur!" “Not that I know of." “Oh, well,
well, it makes no maxim between you an' me, at all, at all; but the Lord
mark you to grace, any how; it's a dacent name sure enough, only if yer
mother was livin', it's herself 'ud be the proud woman, an' well she
might, to see such a clane, promisin' son steppin' home to her from
Lough Derg." “Indeed I'm obliged to you," said I; “I protest I'm obliged
to you, for your good opinion of me." “It's nothin' but what ye desarve,
avick! an' more nor that--yer the makin's of a clargy I'm guessin'?" “I
am," said I, “surely designed for that." “Oh, I knew it, I knew it,
it's in your face; you've the sogarth in yer very face; an' well will ye
become the robes when ye get them on ye: sure, an' to tell you the truth
(in a whisper, stretching up his mouth to my ear), I feel my heart warm
towardst you, somehow." “I declare I feel much the same towards you,"
 I returned, for the fellow in spite of me was gaining upon my good
opinion; “you are a decent, civil soul." “An' for that raison, and for
your dacent mother's sake (sobies-coat inpassy, amin), (* Requiescat
in pace.) I'll jist here offer up the gray profungus (* De profundis)
for the release of her sowl out o' the burning flames of pur-gathur." I
really could not help shuddering at this. He then repeated a psalm for
that purpose, the 130th in our Bible, but the 129th in theirs. When it
was finished, with all due gesticulation, that is to say, having thumped
his breast with great violence, kissed the ground, and crossed himself
repeatedly, he says to me, like a man confident that he had paved his
way to my good graces, “Now, avick, as we did do so much, you're the
very darlin' young man that I won't lave, widout the best, maybe, that's
to come yet, ye see; bekase I'll swap a prayer wid you, this blessed
minute." “I'm very glad you mentioned it," said I. “But you don't know,
maybe, darlin', that I'm undher five ordhers." “Dear me! is it possible
you're under so many?" “Undher five ordhers, acushla!"--“Well," I
replied, “I am ready."--“Undher five ordhers--but I'll lave it to
yourself; only when it's over, maybe, ye'll hear somethin' from me
that'll make you thankful you ever gave me silver any way."

By this time I saw his drift: but he really had managed his point so
dexterously--not forgetting the De profundis--that I gave him tenpence
in silver: he pocketed it with great alacrity, and was at the prayer
in a twinkling, which he did offer up in prime,style--five paters, five
aves, and a creed, whilst I set the same number to his credit. When we
had finished, he made me kneel down to receive his blessing, which he
gave in great form:--“Now," said he, in a low, important tone, “I'm
goin' to show you a thing that'll make you bless the born day you ever
seen my face; and it's this--did ye ever hear of the blessed Thirty
Days' Prayer?" * “I can't say I did." “Well, avick, in good time still;
but there's a blessed book, if you can get it, that has a prayer in it,
named the Thirty Bays' Prayer, an' if ye jist repate that same, every
day for thirty days fastin', there's no request ye'll ax from heaven,
good, bad, or indifferent, but ye'll get. And now do you begrudge
givin'me what I got?" “Not a bit," said I, “and I'll certainly look
for the book." “No, no, the darlin' fine young man," soliloquizing
aloud--“Well and well did I know you wouldn't, nor another along wid
it--sensible and learned as ye are, to know the blessed worth of what
ye got for it; not makin', at the same time, any comparishment at all at
all atween it and the dirty thrash of riches of this earth, that every
wan has their heart fixed upon--exceptin' them that the Lord gives the
larnin' an' the edication to, to know betther."

     * There is such a prayer, and I have often seen it in
     Catholic Prayer-books.

Oh, flattery! flattery! and a touch of hypocrisy on my part! Between ye,
did ye make another lodgment on my purse, which was instantly lightened
by an additional bank token, value tenpence, handed over to this
sugar-tongued old knave. When he Pocketed this, he shook me cordially
by the band, bidding me “not to forgit the Thirty Days' Prayer, at any
rate." He then glided off with his small, sallow face, stuck between his
little shrugged shoulders, fingering his beads, and praying audibly with
great apparent fervor, whilst his little keen eye was reconnoitering for
another pigeon. In the course of a few minutes, I saw him lead a large,
soft, warm-looking, countryman, over to a remote corner, and enter into
an earnest conversation with him, which, I could perceive, ended by
their both kneeling down, I suppose, to swap a prayer; and I have no
doubt but he lightened the honest countryman's purse, as well as mine.

On the third day I was determined, if possible, to leave it early; so
I performed my third and last station round the chapel and the beds,
reduced to such a state of weakness and hunger, that the coats of my
stomach must have been rubbing against each other; my feet were quite
shapeless. I therefore made the shortest circuit and the longest strides
possible, until I finished it.

I witnessed this day, immediately before my departure from this gloomy
and truly purgatorial settlement, a scene of some interest. A priest was
standing before the door of the dwelling-house, giving tickets to such
as were about to confess, this being a necessary point. When he had
despatched them all, I saw an old man and his son approach him, the man
seemingly sixty, the boy about fourteen. They had a look of peculiar
decency, but were thin and emaciated, even beyond what the rigor of
their penance here could produce. The youth tottered with weakness, and
the old man supported him with much difficulty. It is right to mention
here, that this pilgrimage was performed in a season when sickness and
famine prevailed fearfully in this kingdom. They advanced up to the
priest to pay their money on receiving the tickets; he extended his palm
from habit, but did not speak. The old man had some silver in his hand;
and as he was about to give it to the priest, I saw the child look up
beseechingly in his father's face, whilst an additional paleness came
over his own, and his eyes filled with tears. The father saw and felt
the appeal of the child, and hesitated; the priest's arm was still
extended, his hand open:--“Would you, sir," said the old man, addressing
the priest, “be good enough to hear a word from me?" “For what?" replied
the priest, in a sharp tone. “Why, sir," answered the old man, “I am
very much distressed." “Ay--it is the common story! Come, pay the money;
don't you see I've no time to lose?" “I won't detain you a minute, sir,"
 said the man; “this child"----“You want to keep the money, then? that's
your object; down with it on the instant, and begone."

The old man dropped it into the priest's hand, in a kind of start,
produced by the stern tone of voice in which he was addressed. When the
priest got the money he seemed in a better humor, not wishing, I could
see, to send the man away with a bad impression of him. “Well, now
what's that you were going to say to me?" “Why, sir," resumed the old
man, “that I have not a penny in my possession behind what I have just
now put into your hand--not the price of a morsel for this child or
myself, although we have forty miles to travel!" “Well, and how am I to
remedy that? What brought you here, if you had not what would bear your
expenses?" “I had, sir, on setting out; but my little boy was five
days sick in Petigo, and that took away with it what we had to carry
us home." “And you expect me, in short, to furnish you with money to do
that? Do you think, my good man, there are not paupers in my own parish,
that have a better right to assistance than you have!" “I do not doubt
it, sir," said he, “I do not doubt it; and as for myself I could crawl
home upon anything; but what is this child to do? he is already sinking
with hunger and--" The poor man's utterance here failed him as he cast
his eyes on the poor, pale boy. When he had recovered himself a little,
he proceeded:-- “He is all that it has pleased God to leave to his
afflicted mother and me, out of seven of them. His other brother and
sister and him were all we had living for some years; they are seven
weeks dead yesterday, of the fever; and when he was given over, sir, his
mother and I vowed, that if God would spare him to us, either she or
I would bring him to the 'Island,' as soon as he would be able for the
journey. He was but weakly settin' out, and we had no notion that the
station was so tryin' as it is: it has nearly overcome my child, and how
he will be able to walk forty miles in this weak, sickly state, God only
knows?" “Oh! sir," said the boy, “my poor father is worse off and weaker
than I am, and he is sick too, sir; I am only weak, but not sick; but
my poor father's both weak and sick," said he, his tears streaming from
him, as he pressed his father's arm to his breast--“my poor father is
both weak and. sick, ay, and hungry too," said he. “Take this," said the
priest, “it is as much as I can afford to give you," putting a silver
fivepenny-piece into his hand; “there's a great deal of poor in my own
parish." “Alas I thought, you are not a father. Indeed, sir," said the
poor man, “I thought you would have allowed me to keep the silver I gave
you, as how can we travel two-and-forty miles on this?" “I tell you,
my good man," said the priest, resuming a sterner tone, “I have done as
much for you as I can afford: and if every one gives you as much, you
won't be ill off."

The tears stood in the old man's eyes, as he fixed them hopelessly upon
his boy whilst the child looked ravenously at the money, trifling as it
was, and seemed to think of nothing except getting the worth of it of
food. As they left the priest, “Oh, come, come father," said the little
fellow, “come and let us get something to eat." “Easy, dear, till I draw
my breath a little, for, John I am weak; but the Lord is strong, and
will bring us home, if we put our trust in him; for if he's not more
merciful to his poor creatures, than some that acts in his name here,
John, we would have a bad chance." They here sat down on the ledge of
a rock, a few yards from the chapel, and I still remained bound to the
spot by the interest I felt in what I had just witnessed. “What do you
want, sir," said the priest to me; “did you get your ticket?" “I did,
sir," I replied; “but I hope you will permit me to become an advocate
for that poor man and his son, as I think their case is one in which
life and death are probably concerned!" “Really, my good young man, you
may spare your advocacy, I'm not to be duped with such tales as you've
heard." “By the tale, sir, if tale you call it," I returned, “which the
father told, I think, any man might be guided in his charity; but really
I think the most pitiful story was to be read in their faces." “Do
you think so? Well, if that's your opinion, I'm sure you have a fair
opportunity of being charitable; as for me, I have no more time to
lose with either you or them," said he, going into a comfortable house,
whilst I could have fairly seen him up to the neck in the blessed
element about us. I here stepped over, and instantly desired the old man
to hand me the fivepence, telling him at the same time that there
was something better in prospect, as a proof of which I gave him
half-a-crown. I then returned to the priest, and laid his fivepence down
on the table before him; for I had the generosity, the fire, and the
candor of youth about me, unrepressed by the hardening experience of
life. “What's this, sir?" said he. “Your money, sir," I replied--“it
is such a very trifle, that it would be of no service to them, and they
will be enabled to go home without it; the old man returns it." “That is
as much as to say," he replied, sarcastically, “that you will patronize
them yourself; I wish you joy of it. Was it to witness the distresses of
others that you came to the island, let me ask?" “Perhaps I came from a
worse motive," I returned. “I haven't the least doubt of it," said he;
“but move off--one word of insolence more," said he, stretching to a
cutting whip, for the use of which he was deservedly famous. “I will cut
you up, sirrah, while I'm able to stand over you." “Upon my word," said
I, extending my feet one after another, “you have cut me up pretty
well already, I think; but," I added, with coolness, “is that, sir, the
weapon of a Christian?" “Is it the weapon of a Christian, sir? whatever
weapon it is, you will soon feel the weight of it," said he, brandishing
it over my head. “My good father," said I, “do you remember, since
nothing else will restrain you, that the laws of the country will not
recognize such horsewhip Christianity?" “The laws of the country. Oh,
God help it for a country! Yes! yes! excellent. Here Michael--I say,
come here--drive out this follow. I'll be calm; I'll not, put myself in
a passion--out with him! this fellow." On turning round to contemplate
the person spoken to, we recognized each other as slight aquaintances.
“Bless me," said he, “what's the matter? Why," he added, addressing me,
“what's this?" “How? do you know him, Michael?" “Tut, I do--isn't he
for the mission?" “Oh--ho!--is that it? well, I'm glad I know so much;
good-bye to you, for the present; never fear but I'll keep my eye upon
you." So saying, we separated. Michael followed me out. “This is an
awkward business," said he, “you had better make submission, and ask his
pardon; for you know he can injure your prospects, and will do so,
if you don't submit; he is not of the most forgiving cast--but that's
between ourselves." “What o'clock is it?" said I. “Near three." “Well,
good-bye, and God bless you; if he had a spark of humanity in him, I
would beg his pardon at once, if I thought I had offended him; but as
to making submission to such a man, as you call it--why--this is a very
sultry day, my friend." I returned directly to the old man and his son;
and, let purity or motive go as it may, truth to tell, they were no
losers by the priest's conduct; as I certainly slipped them a few
additional shillings, out of sheer contempt for him. On tasting a little
refreshment in one of the cabins, the son fainted--but on the whole they
were enabled to accomplish their journey home; and the father's blessing
was surely a sufficient antidote against the Priest's resentment.

I was now ready to depart; and on my way to the boat, found my two old
female companions watching, lest I should pass, and they might miss my
company on the way. It was now past three o'clock, and we determined to
travel as far as we could that night, as the accommodations were vile
in Petigo; and the spokeswoman mentioned a house of entertainment, about
twelve miles forward, where, she said, we would find better treatment.
When we got on terra firma, the first man I saw was the monosyllabic
humorist, sitting on a hillock resting himself--his eyes fixed on the
earth, and he evidently in a brown study on what he had gone through. He
was drawing in his breath gradually, his cheeks expanding all the while,
until they reached the utmost point of distention, when he would all
at once let it go with a kind of easy puff, ending in a groan, as he
surveyed his naked feet, which were now quite square, and, like my own,
out of all shape. I asked him how he liked the station; he gave me one
of the old looks, shrugged his shoulders, but said nothing--it was,
however, a shrug condemnatory. I then asked him would he ever make
another pilgrimage? He answered me by another shrug, a grave look, dryly
raising his eye-brows, and a second appeal to his feet, all of which
I easily translated into strong negatives. We refreshed ourselves in
Petigo.

When we were on the way home, I observed that, although the singular
and fatal accident which befell the young man in the prison excited very
little interest at the time of its occurrence, yet no sooner had they
who witnessed it got clear of the island, than it was given with every
possible ornament; so that it would be as easy to recognize the
plain fact, when decked out by their elucidations, as it would be to
understand the sense of an original author, after it has come through
the hands of half a hundred commentators. But human nature is a darker
enigma than any you could find, in the “Lady's Magazine." Who would
suppose, for instance, that it was the same motive which set their
tongues wagging now, that had chained their spirits by the strong force
of the marvellous and the terrible, while they were in prison! Yet this
was the fact; but their influence hung while there, like the tyrant's
sword, over each individual head; and until the danger of falling asleep
in the “Prison" was past, they could feel no interest for anything
beyond themselves. In both cases, however, they were governed by the
force of the marvellous and the terrible.

When we had finished our journey for the day, I was glad to find a
tolerable bed; and never did man enjoy such a luxury of sweet sleep as I
did that night. My old companion, too, evinced an attention to me seldom
experienced in an accidental traveller. She made them get down water and
bathe my feet, and asked me at what hour I would set out in the morning,
telling me that she would see my clothes brushed, and everything done
herself--so minute was the honest creature in her little attentions. I
told her I would certainly take a nap in the morning, as I had slept so
little for the last three nights, and was besides so fatigued. “Musha to
be sure, and why not, agra! afther the hard bout you had in that blessed
Island! betoken that you're tinder and too soft rared to bear it
like them that the work hardens; sleep!--to be sure you'll sleep your
fill--you want it, in coorse; and now go to bed, and you'll appear quite
another man in the mornin', plaise God!"

I did not awake the next morning till ten o'clock, when I found the sun
shining full into the room. I accordingly dressed myself partially, and
I say partially--for I was rather surprised to find an unexpected chasm
in my wardrobe; neither my hat, coat, nor waistcoat being forthcoming.
But I immediately made myself easy, by supposing that my kind companion
had brought them to be brushed. Yet I relapsed into something more than
surprise when I saw my fellow-traveler's redoubtable jacket lying on the
seat of a chair, and her hare's-skin cap on the top of it. My misgivings
now were anything but weak; nor was I at all improved, either in my
religion or philosophy, when, on calling up the landlady I heard that my
two companions had set out that morning at four o'clock. I then inquired
about my clothes, but all to no purpose; the poor landlady knew nothing
about them: which, in fact, was the case; but she told me that the old
one brushed them before she went away, saying that they were ready
for me to put on whenever I wanted them. “Well," said I, “she has made
another man of me." The landlady desired me to try if I had my purse;
and I found that the kind creature had certainly spared my purse, but
showed no mercy at all to what it contained, which was one pound in
paper, and a few shillings in silver, the latter, however, she left me.
I had now no alternative but to don the jacket and the hare's-skin cap,
which when I had done, with as bad a grace and as mortified a visage
as ever man dressed himself with, I found I had not the slightest
encouragement to throw my eye over the uniform gravity of my appearance,
as I used to do in the black, for, alas! that which I was proudest of,
viz. the clerical cut which it bestowed upon me was fairly gone--I had
now more the appearance of a poacher than a priest.

 

In this trim did I return to my friends--a goose stripped of my
feathers; a dupe beknaved and beplundered--having been almost starved
to death in the “island," and nearly cudgelled by one of the priests. As
soon as I crossed the threshold at home, the whole family were on their
knees to receive my blessing, there being a peculiar virtue in the Lough
Derg blessing. The next thing I did, after giving them an account of
the manner in which I was plundered and stripped, was to make a due
distribution of the pebbles* of the lake, to contain which my sisters
had, previous to my journey, wrought me a little silk bag. This I
brought home, stuffed as full as my purse was empty; for the epicene old
villain left it to me in all its plenitude--disdaining to touch it. When
I went to mass the following Sunday, I was surrounded by crowds, among
whom I distributed my blessing, with an air of seriousness not at all
lessened by the loss of my clothes and the emptying of my purse. On
telling that part of my story to the priest, he laughed till the tears
ran down his cheeks. He was a small, pleasant little man, who was seldom
known to laugh at anybody's joke but his own. Now, the said merriment of
the Reverend Father I felt as contributing to make me look exceedingly
ridiculous and sheepish. “So," says he, “you have fallen foul of
Nell M'Collum, the most notorious shuler in the province! a gipsy, a
fortuneteller, and a tinker's widow; but rest contented, you are not the
first she has gulled--but beware the next time."--“There is no danger of
that," said I, with peculiar emphasis.

     * An uncommon virtue in curing all kinds of complaints
     is ascribed to these pebbles, small bags of which are
     brought home by the pilgrims, and distributed to their
     respective relations and friends.



